## Neh-thalggu Tactics


There’s a funny disconnect between the description of the neh-thalggu in Boo’s Astral Menagerie (“… [A] bulbous body and six legs resembling those of a crustacean. Four bulging eyes and a tooth-filled maw dominate its hideous visage. Behind and above these features, one or more lumps protrude from its body, each one containing a brain the neh-thalggu has consumed”) and the illustration next to it, which might very well be considered cute. If it weren’t the size of a horse, that is.
Also called “brain collectors,” neh-thalggu do just what their sobriquet suggests: They go around surgically harvesting other creatures’ brains, which they use as psionic batteries. According to the flavor text, when they amass a dozen brains, they’re fully charged and ready to return to the Far Realm.
With exceptional Constitution and high Strength representing the defensive and offensive peaks in their ability contour, the neh-thalggu is a dauntless toe-to-toe combatant. It has 120 feet of darkvision, so it will see the adventurers who make the mistake of parking their spelljamming ship on its gloomy little moon before they see it. It also doesn’t require air—although, by omission, it does need food and sleep, so you may not want to leave it someplace totally lifeless for too long.

Its offensive actions consist of two conventional melee attacks, Bite and Claw (Claw is oddly weak, but there’s no erratum stating that a hit should deal 2d4 + 2 damage rather than 1d4 + 2; maybe it’s just because the neh-thalggu’s legs are spindly); Mind Blast, a powerful ability on a 5–6 recharge; various psionic “Spellcasting” options; and the money move, Extract Brain.
Beginning with the end in mind, as highly effective monsters do, let’s examine the prerequisites of Extract Brain. First, the target must be a humanoid; Wolfy’s brain won’t cut it. Second, the target must be incapacitated. Third, to accomplish the neh-thalggu’s goal, the damage dealt by Extract Brain must reduce the target to 0 hp. On average, that means the target must have 35 hp or fewer, but to be truly effective, the neh-thalggu wants to be confident that Extract Brain will work most of the time. The thresholds for various definitions of “most of the time” are 33 hp or fewer for a two-thirds chance of success, 28 hp or fewer for 90 percent and 26 hp or fewer for 95 percent. (This action is presumably meant to represent the process of surgically removing the target’s brain, so I question whether the damage ought to be piercing; slashing makes more sense to me.) No target has a hit point indicator on their forehead that a foe can read off, but since this is the neh-thalggu’s whole shtick, I think we can say it intuitively recognizes when a target is in a proper state for decerebration.
So what’s a good way for a neh-thalggu to incapacitate a humanoid? Hey, look: Mind Blast does exactly that. However, this isn’t a wide-area, general-purpose Mind Blast, like a mind flayer’s; it’s targeted at a single humanoid creature. It also has a range of only 10 feet, and it targets Wisdom. How good is the neh-thalggu at choosing low-Wisdom targets? Not that great, actually. Its Intelligence falls short of what it needs to reliably assess its enemies’ weaknesses, and its Wisdom falls short of what it needs to be selective in its targeting. However, Mind Blast has that 5–6 recharge, suggesting that it’s a preferred ability. What I think happens here, then, is that a neh-thalggu doesn’t think too much about whom it attacks first. It just marches right up to someone and Mind Blasts them, and if they fail their save, says, “Oh, hey, it actually worked!” and follows up with Extract Brain, provided their hit points are low enough.
This strategy isn’t really optimal, at least not at first glance. But it’s also fair to ask who a neh-thalggu’s opponents are likely to be. As a CR 4 creature, it’s a suitable solo opponent only for player characters at level 4 or below. Three level 5 PCs can squish one, and at higher levels it’s likely to meet an even sadder, swifter end. How many hit points does a typical level 4 PC have? According to Mike “Sly Flourish” Shea, approximately 31; 75 percent have 39 or fewer. Subtract 6 for a successful Mind Blast (the mean is 9; 6 is one standard deviation below that), and Extract Brain has a reasonable chance to succeed against anyone except, maybe, the barbarian.
The more likely scenario, though, is that Mind Blast doesn’t work, because only a target with a +0 or lower Wisdom saving throw modifier does has at least a two-thirds chance of failing. In this instance, the neh-thalggu has little choice but to gnash and slash at its chosen target until Mind Blast recharges and it gets to try again.
Well, there’s also Spellcasting. When I first read this trait, I misconstrued it, thinking that casting the neh-thalggu’s various spells required it to spend the brains it had collected. On reflection, though, this interpretation doesn’t make sense. First, collecting brains is the whole point; spending brains is not something the neh-thalggu wants to do, and only a couple of its spells hold up to cost-benefit analysis if it has to use up brains to cast them. Second, reading the wording of the action absolutely literally, “It must have consumed the requisite number of brains to cast the spell” says nothing about losing any of those brains upon casting. And finally, if each new brain consumed unlocks a new spell, that makes the neh-thalggu more powerful with each brain it consumes, which is interesting. It makes it important to stop the neh-thalggu as soon as possible.
Going down the list, from most to least expensive:

Stinking cloud causes creatures that fail their saves to spend their action retching and reeling, which is the same effect as incapacitation, but the word “incapacitated” appears nowhere in the spell description, so we can’t construe it as setting targets up for Extract Brain. Bummer.
Major image might lure some creatures close enough that the neh-thalggu might be able to harvest brains from them. There’s nothing else in this stat block that paints it as an ambush predator, though, so I have my doubts.
Hypnotic pattern is legitimately excellent for the neh-thalggu, incapacitating every creature in the area of effect that fails its save and doing so for longer than Mind Blast does. This spell is the one its opponents don’t want it to unlock.
Fear offers little benefit beyond a single opportunity attack.
Spider climb is good for skirmishers that want to dart in and out of enemies’ reach, but for a brute fighter that’s happy to run right into melee, there’s no point. Its targets are on the ground, not on the ceiling. This spell is for running away.
Invisibility is also for running away, but alas, it can’t be combined with spider climb, since both require concentration.
Hold person pins a target in place, both incapacitating them and making them much easier to attack if the neh-thalggu has to chip away at them a bit before using Extract Brain. It would be more tactically solid if it didn’t cost a whole action to cast, though.
Darkness is good for frustrating rogues, as well as spellcasters who need to see their targets, but it comes with no direct benefit. The neh-thalggu’s darkvision penetrates only ordinary darkness, not magical darkness.
Tenser’s floating disk—seriously?
Magic missile deals an average 8 damage, guaranteed. A completely successful Multiattack deals 20. Multiattack is better anytime the neh-thalggu has a better than 40 percent chance to hit, i.e., when the target has AC 16 or lower. So there’s a use case, at least.
Detect magic is OK, I guess, but the neh-thalggu doesn’t have any particular weakness for a magic weapon or any other magic item to target, so why should it care?
Arms of Hadar is fairly solid if the neh-thalggu minds itself surrounded. Even a brute doesn’t like to be double-teamed.

In short, hypnotic pattern, magic missile and arms of Hadar have real offensive potential; hold person has some potential, but it has to be cast before engaging in melee; and invisibility and spider climb are helpful for a neh-thalggu that’s seriously wounded (reduced to 38 hp or fewer) and looking for a way out.
There’s one other problem with the neh-thalggu’s Spellcasting, though, and that’s the embarrassingly low spell save DC. Eleven? That pretty much scratches hold person off the list; with such a low probability of its taking effect, casting that spell is a waste of time. At least hypnotic pattern and arms of Hadar affect multiple targets, one of whom might fail. Let’s be clear, though: When the neh-thalggu casts hypnotic pattern, it’s not looking to incapacitate all its enemies. It’s hoping to incapacitate at least one. Similarly, with arms of Hadar, it’s hoping that one of its targets might take full damage; the only sure thing is that they’ll all take half. The other worthwhile spells don’t require saving throws. Major image and fear, meanwhile, are even more pointless than they seemed to begin with.
The neh-thalggu’s Intelligence 12 is enough for it to be capable of some small measure of planning and analysis, so let’s say it has the presence of mind not to lead immediately with Mind Blast if it has hypnotic pattern available, and the good sense to then attack a target incapacitated by it, if any is available. It may not be able to identify an opponent’s personal, individual weaknesses, but it certainly is smart enough to know when something it did worked as intended. And if it gets into a scrap with a foe wearing heavy armor, or wearing medium armor and carrying a shield, it knows to switch to magic missile rather than take its chances with Multiattack.
Beyond that, though, its tactics are uncomplicated: If no enemy is incapacitated, incapacitate the nearest by the most effective means available. If an enemy is incapacitated and they have few enough hit points to make the attempt worthwhile, extract their brain. If engaged in melee by two or more foes, cast arms of Hadar. Otherwise, Claw and Bite until something better is available. When seriously wounded, Disengage and skedaddle.
Next: feyrs.
