## Warforged Titan and Colossus Tactics

It’s funny, but everyone I know who’s created a warforged player character, including myself, has chosen to make them a cleric, druid or monk. In the lore of their creation, the warforged were purpose-built to be soldiers. Yet it seems to be a universal impulse—at least, among the kind of people I interact with—to have them turn away from that path and toward one of introspection.
If you’re looking for any of that in the stat blocks of the warforged titan and the warforged colossus, you may as well stop looking, because you’re not going to find it. The titan is a barely sentient brute; the colossus, a barely sentient mega-brute.
Let’s start with the warforged titan and its Platforms trait, which allows it to be ridden by two Medium or smaller creatures, like Jaeger pilots. This trait introduces the question of whether or not the warforged titan should be considered a mount, and if so, whether it can be either controlled or independent (Player’s Handbook, chapter 9, “Mounted Combat”). As I read the rules, I think it can be considered a mount, but it has to be treated as an independent mount, or it can’t use its attack actions. (In addition to confining it to the Dash, Disengage and Dodge actions, treating it as a controlled mount would require you to decide which of its riders is the one controlling it; they can’t both do so.) Also, the fact that its riders can make melee attacks only with spears or reach weapons, and only against Large or larger targets, seems to imply that the converse is also true, although I personally would allow flying foes to target and be targeted by the riders as well. I see no reason to arm those riders with anything except polearms unless they’re Small and unable to wield those weapons without disadvantage.
Anyway, we now have two more questions to answer: How do a warforged titan’s riders want to use it, and what does the warforged titan want to do when it isn’t told? A partial answer to both questions is “Hulk smash.” With extraordinary Strength and Constitution, average Wisdom and below-average everything else, a warforged titan’s only logical combat role is to close to melee distance and start whaling. Because all its attacks have 10 feet of reach, that’s as close as it needs to get unless its riders want to attack, too. For that to happen, the target needs to be within 5 feet of the titan.
The titan’s Multiattack comprises one Axehand attack and one Hammerfist attack, but the natural order is Hammerfist, then Axehand. That’s because Hammerfist can knock targets prone, while Axehand deals bonus damage to prone targets. (The order doesn’t matter if the titan is attacking an object or structure, which can’t be knocked prone.)
Sweeping Axe is an area attack against every creature within 10 feet of the titan. Not “every creature of the warforged titan’s choice”: Sweeping Axe is indiscriminate. (Let’s read it charitably, though, and assume that the titan’s riders are exempt.) Furthermore, I’d say it’s reflexive, used whenever it’s available and at least two enemy targets are within reach, despite its recharging only on a 6. The titan simply doesn’t have the Intelligence to weigh whether it ought to wait for a more opportune moment.
With a Wisdom of only 11 and Intelligence of only 3, the warforged titan is indiscriminate in its target selection, with one exception: Given a choice between attacking a living target directly or an object or structure within which living targets are taking shelter, it always favors the object or structure, because the Siege Monster trait doubles its damage. Again, this choice is mechanistic. It deviates from this preference only when one or both of its riders order it to, and if the incoming orders differ, it obeys the one most consistent with what it naturally prefers.
Unlike many constructs, warforged titans do instinctively retreat when severely damaged (reduced to 50 hp or fewer). The titans represent a huge investment of material and arcane resources, and their masters don’t want that investment to go to waste. They retreat at normal speed, taking the Dodge action as they withdraw. However, if ordered by their riders to stay in the fight, they’ll obey.
If the warforged titan is Jaeger-like, the warforged colossus is like the Macross, with room inside for a full crew complement along with squads of soldiers. It doesn’t require a crew to operate, however, and in fact the flavor text refers to one damaged and abandoned colossus gone rogue.
Also a brute, with an ability contour similar to the warforged titan’s (aside from having significantly greater, though still below-average, Charisma), the warforged colossus strongly favors melee engagement, but it does possess two ranged attacks, Eldritch Turret and Incinerating Beam.
A colossus is a Big Bad fully worthy of the name. It’s immune to physical damage from nonmagical attacks, its form can’t be magically altered, and it has Legendary Resistance and Magic Resistance. It also has the Towering Terror trait, a reduced-radius variation on Frightful Presence that requires no action to invoke, kicking in automatically whenever an enemy creature approaches to within 30 feet of it or vice versa.
The colossus’s Multiattack includes one Slam attack, two Eldritch Turret attacks and a Stomp. Both Eldritch Turret and Stomp can knock opponents prone, but Slam deals no additional damage as a result, as the titan’s Axehand attack does.
However, the colossus has other incentives to Stomp first and Slam afterward. First, Slam has the potential to knock an opponent out of range of Stomp, so there’s some incentive to Stomp first and Slam afterward. (Note, though, that Slam’s knockback effect is optional: It can push the target away, but it doesn’t have to.) Second, Stomp is especially nasty because it can impose both the prone condition and the restrained condition. Because a restrained creature’s speed is reduced to 0, it can’t stand up from the prone position. The colossus can therefore make a follow-up Slam attack with advantage—but only if it first relocates to within 5 feet of the target, even though Slam has a 20-foot reach. [Reader J’nanin correctly points out that if the warforged colossus relocates, it immediately releases the target—and any other creature it Stomped on—from the restrained condition. The target is still prone, though, so a Slam attack against it from within 5 feet does still have advantage. The question is, how does the colossus choose whether to keep one or more targets pinned or make a follow-up attack against one of them? Between its low Intelligence and its nature as a construct, I’m not sure it does choose; I think it acts mechanistically, and it exploits advantage whenever there’s advantage to exploit, which means forgoing the benefits of keeping one or more creatures restrained. However, if it’s being piloted by a more intelligent creature, that creature might order it to change its attack sequence to end with Stomp, or to make a follow-up Slam attack without advantage in order to keep the target and/or other creatures pinned.]
Jeremy Crawford has been asked about this issue before, and his intent is crystal-clear: Prone confers advantage or disadvantage on attacks based on the attacker’s distance from the target, not based on the reach of the attacker’s weapon. If the colossus remains beyond 5 feet from the target, disadvantage from attacking a prone target cancels out advantage from attacking a restrained target, and the roll is made straight. The same calculus affects Eldritch Turret, regardless of range, since ranged attacks against non-incapacitated opponents in close combat always have disadvantage: Either the colossus has disadvantage from making a ranged attack from within 5 feet, or it has disadvantage from attacking a prone target from more than 5 feet away. In both cases, disadvantage is canceled out by advantage from attacking a restrained target.
I’ll come back to the Multiattack in a moment, but first I want to discuss Incinerating Beam. Note the fine print: It affects creatures only. The colossus can’t use it to torch a guardhouse. However, it’s also on a 5–6 recharge, so the colossus always wants to use it if it can. To make it fully worthwhile, though, it needs to have at least five targets in the beam’s area of effect—or all of its enemies, whichever is less. (Really, it should probably be at least 10 targets, since the beam is twice as wide as most, but that’s never going to happen.)
Since that’s such a strict criterion, let’s see if there’s any way to justify a looser one. A Multiattack in which all attacks hit and Stomp deals full damage to four creatures (appropriate for a cylindrical effect with a 20-foot radius) deals a total of 198 damage. An Incinerating Beam would have to deal full damage to four targets to exceed this total, and it would do so by a fairly significant margin. We can therefore settle for four targets in the beam.
We’re finally zeroing in on our heuristic. Incinerating Beam is the preferred choice of action, but only if the colossus can position itself to catch at least four living foes in its area of effect. (It can’t fly, but it doesn’t give two whits about opportunity attacks—not with AC 23 and more than 400 hp.) If it can’t, or if Incinerating Beam is on cooldown, then it makes its Multiattack in the following order: Eldritch Turret × 2, Stomp, move if necessary, Slam.
Anytime you’re dealing with a knockback ability, it’s fun to think about punching foes over cliffs or into environmental hazards. Unfortunately, with only dog-level Intelligence, the colossus lacks the imagination to come up with such stunts and executes them only if commanded by a smarter being that tells it to. However, the colossus, like the titan, has the Siege Monster trait and loves to blow up cover. Siege Monster deals double damage to objects and structures regardless of the type of attack, and Eldritch Turret has a range of 300 feet. Thus, the colossus gets busy obliterating its opponents’ fortifications while still on the march toward the battle area. With a speed of 60 feet, it gets five rounds in a row to do so. If a fortification is still intact by the time it arrives, it adds Stomp and Slam to the mix. Once the walls come tumbling down, it turns its attention to the living, screaming fleshlings scurrying out of the rubble.
There’s an ambiguity in the Stomp action as it’s written: “Structures, as well as nonmagical objects that are neither being worn nor carried, take the same amount of damage if they are in the cylinder (no save).” Does that clause override Siege Monster, meaning structures and objects take 6d10 bludgeoning damage, or does Siege Monster override that clause, meaning structures and objects take 12d10 bludgeoning damage? From a pure rules-lawyer perspective, I think Siege Monster has to be considered the general rule, since that trait appears in many stat blocks with identical text, and Stomp the specific rule that overrides it. I find that interpretation unsatisfying, though, and think Siege Monster should cause structures and objects to take twice as much damage from Stomp as creatures take, just as it does in combination with any other attack. (I’ll throw the question out to Wizards of the Coast on Twitter for a ruling, as I’ve done before, but be warned that WotC hasn’t been forthcoming with answers to questions like these for a while now.)
Like the titan, the warforged colossus has a smidgen of self-preservation instinct and withdraws when severely damaged (reduced to 164 hp or fewer), Dodging as it retreats except when it can torch its foes with Incinerating Beam on the way out. It stays in the fight, though, if a superior intelligence commands it to.
Next: fastieths and clawfoots. (Clawfeet?)
