## Planescape Faction Agent Tactics, Part 5


Only two Planescape faction agents to go—and another weird case of alignment dissonance. But first, the one that makes sense: the Mercykiller bloodhounds. The “Mercy” in their name is ironic; they have none, pursuing and punishing the convicted with cold, implacable determination. They’re aptly associated with the lawful neutral/evil plane of Acheron, realm of brutality and despotism. As you might expect, they despise the hooligans of the Hands of Havoc. According to Sigil and the Outlands, they also conflict with the Mind’s Eye and the Society of Sensation, although I have to think it’s more a case of those factions’ detesting the Mercykillers rather than vice versa. The Mercykillers, I suspect, don’t waste a thought on those factions at all, unless one of their agents gets in their way.
Mercykiller bloodhounds are brute melee fighters, with very high Strength and Constitution, but they also have high Wisdom … the better to track you with, my dear, as their expertise in Perception and Survival makes plain. Their base speed is 40 feet, faster than that of their median opponent … the better to catch you with. I’m intrigued and impressed by their Portal Sense trait, because when you think about it, it makes perfect sense: If someone they’re pursuing is gating out to escape, they’re gonna know about it. I only wish the radius were larger—say, 120 feet, rather than 30—to introduce the tension of having to stop their quarry before they reach the portal. Because they instinctively know the destination of each portal, they can at least report back on where their quarry has gone.
But that knowledge is somewhat redundant to what they get from their Marked for Pursuit bonus action, which keeps them informed of precisely where their target is as long as they’re on the same plane and what plane their target has fled to if they aren’t. The saving throw DC of 13 on that ability seems pitifully low, considering that low-level player characters are unlikely to find themselves running from a Mercykiller bloodhound, and even mid-level PCs won’t be pursued by more than one. Note, though, that targets of Marked for Pursuit have disadvantage on their saving throw against it if they’re missing any hit points—effectively turning DC 13 into DC 18, unless they have exceptional Charisma and proficiency in the save. That’s no joke. Mercykiller bloodhounds are brutal thugs, but they’re not dim: they don’t use Marked for Pursuit against an opponent unless they’ve already drawn blood, or unless they can see that the opponent is wounded already.

There’s not a lot beyond these two features. Mercykiller bloodhounds have one attack, Clawed Gauntlet, which they can make three times per turn. It’s a melee attack, of course, so what else is for there for them to do but chase, whomp, whomp, whomp, repeat? The flavor text isn’t explicit about it, but reading between the lines suggests a revenant-like zealotry that precludes retreat. Others flee from them; they do not flee. They can and do plan and coordinate their assaults, and they use what information they have to prioritize targets so as to maximize their likelihood of success. They adapt to new information, but they’re not going to be easily baited into going after a lower-priority target.
Other than the Doomguard doom lord, the highest-CR faction agent in Morte’s Planar Parade is the Fraternity of Order law bender, and this is where the alignment and planar connections get iffy again. “Bending the law,” of course, means adhering to the letter of the law while committing all sorts of unsavory offenses against the spirit of it. You might think a faction aligned with the Clockwork Nirvana of Mechanus would hold both the letter and the spirit of the law in equal, paramount regard—that its members’ hearts and minds would be intrinsically, extraordinarily punctilious. I would think that, certainly. Yet here we have a whole faction, consisting in large part of con artists and shady lawyers, whose raison d’être is the perversion of law for one’s own ends, particularly the pursuit of power. Smells like chaotic subterfuge to me … or at least malware in the mighty cosmic Analytical Engine.
According to Sigil, the Fratboys (Wizards of the Coast can continue to use Zeb Cook’s nickname for the faction, “Guvners,” but come on, we know how our players are going to refer to a faction with “Fraternity” in its name) are allied with the Harmonium and the Mercykillers. Frankly, I’m not sure why the Harmonium would put up with the Fratboys, since the Harmonium actually cares about maintaining an orderly society, and the Fratboys’ antics introduce tension into that. But I can certainly see how the Fratboys might view both the Harmonium and the Mercykillers—and, for that matter, the Fated—as useful idiots. They oppose the Hands of Havoc, probably because the latter make a mockery of the Fratboys’ careful study and manipulation of rules, laws and axioms. Why go to all that trouble when you can get your way by setting things on fire?
Fraternity of Order law benders are spellslingers, specifically wizards, with extraordinary Intelligence and high Dexterity. Although Dex is their primary defensive ability, they don’t have proficiency in Dex saves—but they do have proficiency in Constitution and Wisdom saves. That proficiency, plus the fact that their Wisdom is very high to begin with, gives them substantial resistance to magical manipulation. If the way of Mercykiller bloodhounds is to chase, and never to be chased, the way of law benders is to fiddle, from a safe distance, and never to be fiddled with.
Given that, I wish their stat block included some enchantment and/or transmutation magic, but it seems that law benders, as agents of the Fraternity of Order, are oriented mainly toward removing obstacles to the faction’s goals by blasting them to bits. Their Arcane Burst attack can be used in melee or at range, but even with mage armor on all the time, law benders have little appetite for melee. They can attack with Arcane Burst from up to 90 feet away. If an opponent gets too close for comfort, they simply use their Spatial Loophole bonus action at the start of their turn to teleport back 30 feet before using their action to Multiattack.
As an alternative action, Power of Authority has to prove its value against the opportunity cost of giving up an average 51 damage from three mage laser hits. No, it doesn’t! As reader GB37 points out, the law bender’s Multiattack includes a use of either Power of Authority and Spellcasting—a good thing, because if it really did have that steep an opportunity cost, it might well never get used. Instead, the opportunity cost has more to do with whom the law bender is targeting with Power of Authority: They’ll get only a few uses of it in each combat encounter, so they don’t want to choose the wrong target. That means two things: Whomever the law bender targets with it has to pose a grave and immediate threat, and they have to be likely to fail an Intelligence saving throw. Fortunately, Intelligence is a popular dump stat, although not many players dump it so hard that they’re left with a negative saving throw modifier. Unfortunately, against DC 16, even a +2 save mod is enough for Power of Authority to fall short of a two-thirds chance of success.
Thus, Fraternity of Order law benders don’t even try to use Power of Authority against an opponent unless their Intelligence saving throw modifier is +1 or lower (their Intelligence is high enough that they can effectively read the number off an opponent’s character sheet) or they have no other target who meets that criterion. That rules out opposing wizards along with most rogues and druids, who have proficiency in that save. Barbarians, bards, fighters and paladins are the most likely targets of this action, but don’t make assumptions; look at your party’s character sheets and make yourself a list as part of your session prep.
Once you’ve done that, ask yourself whether the PCs on the list can do anything so nasty to a Fraternity of Order law bender that it merits taking them out of the equation with Power of Authority rather than simply blasting them with Arcane Bursts. That “anything” is almost certainly going to be a ranged attack or a spell. Why? Because on top of simply preferring to attack from a distance, law benders can cast fly at will. Not only do they stay 60 to 90 feet away from their foes, they also stay up in the air, out of reach of melee weapons. Fly is the only spell law benders have that requires concentration, so casting it before combat begins, or at least in round 1, is a no-brainer. It offers enough protection that it may even be worth using an entire action on again, in the middle of combat, if a law bender’s concentration on it is disrupted and it falls to the ground.
I think we can safely stipulate that neither mage hand nor prestidigitation is worth spending a whole action on during combat, but what about dispel magic? Well, for starters, if an opponent casts fly in order to reach an airborne Fraternity of Order law bender, they have no compunction whatsoever against casting dispel magic to snuff that transmutation out. But even a +4 Intelligence modifier isn’t quite high enough to give law benders a dependable enough chance of dispelling magic of 4th level or higher, and they know it. Haste and spiritual weapon stand out as two spells of 3rd level or lower that are unquestionably worth making disappear. Conjuration and summoning spells should probably go away if the summoned creature(s) have ranged attacks or can fly, and invisibility, especially on a rogue, can result in inconvenient knavery if left unaddressed. Other low-level sustained spells probably won’t cause problems so serious that repeated Arcane Bursts are insufficient to deal with them. Since a law bender can cast a spell as part of their Multiattack if they aren’t using Power of Authority, and since Power of Authority has a poor chance of success against wizards and druids, it may be particularly worthwhile to shut down their spells, especially if no other promising target of Power of Authority presents themself.
The reaction Probability Loophole is so good—and so thematic—that figuring out when to use it is a real pickle, because a law bender gets only three uses of it per day. I’m almost inclined to say it shouldn’t be used in combat at all. The reason is that this is an unusually, uncannily good ability to use outside combat.
Think about it: If a law bender wants to advance the Fraternity’s goals in ways that don’t involve fighting, what tools do they have? They have mage hand, they have Power of Authority, and they have Probability Loophole. Of these, the last offers the best combination of effectiveness, stealth and low personal risk. It’s not an attack or a spell, so if the law bender is skulking around a corner or up on a balcony from their target, using Probability Loophole won’t give their presence or position away. Power of Authority is an aggressive, damage-dealing move that will probably start a fight if one isn’t already in progress. Probability Loophole is just cramping someone’s style, with plausible deniability.
That being said, I can think of two circumstances in which a Fraternity of Order law bender absolutely should use Probability Loophole in combat: First, to make sure they succeed on their Wisdom saving throw against manipulation magic, if there’s any doubt at all that their +7 save mod will be enough by itself; and second, to thwart a rogue’s Sneak Attack. Fighters, barbies and pallies divide their damage among multiple attacks, which will run a law bender out of uses of Probability Loophole with a quickness. But Sneak Attacking rogues deal burst damage, concentrated into single attacks, and Probability Loophole can thwart them efficiently. Sneak Attacks are also the source of damage most likely to break a law bender’s concentration on fly and cause them to fall, inflicting even more damage. This application makes it all the more important to ensure that there’s no invisible rogue slinking around the area of engagement: Probability Loophole works only against targets the law bender can see.
In general, wizards value their skins more highly than most folks who get into slugfests for a living, and I don’t see why Fraternity of Order law benders should be any different, especially with their very high Wisdom scores. Consequently, unless their duties compel them to do otherwise, they withdraw when only moderately wounded (reduced to 95 hp or fewer)—yet another reason for them to do their best to thwart their rivals’ plans without fighting, if possible. Even if circumstances or obligations compel them to stay in combat longer than that, once they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 54 hp or fewer), they’re out of there, period. Dashing, combined with 60 feet of movement from fly and Spatial Loophole, ought to make escape a cinch.
Next: time dragons.
