## Spelljammer Thri-kreen Tactics


In addition to the basic thri-kreen stat block in the Monster Manual and its two variants, Boo’s Astral Menagerie provides three more—the hunter, the mystic and the gladiator—and these are actually some of the better-constructed stat blocks in Boo’s. Whoever designed these was clearly a fan of the thri-kreen and wanted to see them done right.
To recap what I’ve said about thri-kreen before: They’re skirmishers and shock attackers that employ ambush as a primary strategy. Their leaping ability gives them a mobility advantage in difficult terrain, such as shifting-sand deserts and tall-grass savanna, and the poison in their bite reduces the risk of withdrawing from melee combat without Disengaging. They communicate constantly during combat but generally don’t use this information to coordinate their assaults. Most thri-kreen fight using natural weaponry only, but martially trained individuals wield dual-bladed weapons called gythkas and large, shuriken-like throwing weapons called chatkchas (don’t blame yourself for having trouble pronouncing that last one).
Thri-kreen used to be categorized as humanoids, and the typical specimen had Intelligence 8. The Dungeons & Dragons design team has been moving away from giving humanoid folk average Intelligence scores of less than 10, but in Boo’s, they made the interesting choice not only to give these thri-kreen Intelligence 10 but also to recategorize them as monstrosities (something they also did with the ssurrans). Instead of chaotic neutral, they’re now “any alignment” (not just “typically” CN). You know what that means: Meat’s back on the menu, boys.

So let’s go get some meat. Unlike the stock thri-kreen, the thri-kreen hunter is unambiguously a shock attacker, uninterested in any fight that lasts more than two rounds. Not only is its Wisdom ability score of 14 good for Perception and Survival, it’s also an indicator that it chooses its battles carefully and fights only when it’s confident of winning. Let’s calculate the damage it’s likely to deal in two rounds and use that to figure out who its best targets are.
If it’s launching an attack from hiding, it makes sense to make its first attack with a ranged weapon, so we’ll start with the chatkcha. A hit with that deals 6.5 damage on average, which rounds down to 6—and it so happens that the chatkcha deals this rounded damage figure or more two-thirds of the time, so it’s a good number to work with even if we posit a more cautious approach. Unseen attacker advantage evaporates after the first attack, so you might suppose that the thri-kreen hunter may as well leap from its hiding place and proceed directly to melee engagement—but in this case, you’d be wrong, because the thri-kreen hunter’s Dexterity modifier is higher than its Strength modifier, enough to make the average damage of the two weapons equal and, more importantly, to make the chatkcha deal more damage two-thirds of the time than the gythka deals two-thirds of the time. Therefore, a careful thri-kreen hunter continues to attack with its thrown weapon unless and until its target decides to make it a toe-to-toe fight. And the thri-kreen hunter, choosy about its prey, tries to select targets who won’t do that.
OK, so four chatkcha hits will deal a total of at least 24 damage at least two-thirds of the time. According to Mike “Sly Flourish” Shea, this is a typical number of hit points for a level 3 player character. There we go. That’s the level at which PCs can expect to encounter one or more thri-kreen hunters, up to a number equal to the size of the party—and the level at which Dungeon Masters should choose them as foes. Much beyond that level, thri-kreen hunters would simply choose not to attack. A larger band of thri-kreen hunters, numerous enough to double-team their targets, might be bold enough to take on a party of level 5 to 7, but past this point, not only is it an unattractive challenge for the thri-kreen, it’s also an uninteresting one for the players, who are ready to move on to national security threats.
Thri-kreen hunters don’t want to throw their chatkchas at long range; a 30-foot distance to target is ideal. If their targets withdraw, they pursue. If their targets charge, on the other hand, they switch to their gythkas. This scenario isn’t much to their liking, though: Like most predators, they look askance at prey that fights back, and as noted, they’re also more effective at range. They do, however, have the Parry reaction, which increases their Armor Class to 18 against one melee attack. Since level 3 or 4 PCs generally get only one attack per turn (fighters making use of Action Surge excepted), this gives them a bit more ability to hold out against such a foe.
But taking the time to deal with such a foe isn’t part of the thri-kreen hunter’s game plan. After round 2 of combat, thri-kreen hunters do a quick survey of the battlefield. If they’re close to victory, they’ll finish the fight. But if it looks as though the fighting may drag on longer than one more round, or if they’re taking more abuse than they’re dishing out, it’s time to call it quits. Relying on their natural armor to protect them, they Dash away, adding their Leap bonus action to their movement to put distance between them and their pursuers. They’ll exit even sooner than that if all of their number are moderately wounded (reduced to 42 hp or fewer), or if they themselves are seriously wounded (reduced to 24 hp or fewer).
The thri-kreen mystic has very high Wisdom and high Dexterity, making it a back-rank spellslinger. Further equipping it for this job is its unusual Multiattack, which permits it either two melee weapon attacks or four ranged spell attacks. (Honestly, despite my disdain for “mage lasers,” I wouldn’t mind seeing more Multiattack actions explicitly constructed to favor creatures’ most natural combat roles, as this one is.) Even if it’s accompanied by charging allies, the thri-kreen mystic hangs back, at a distance of 40 to 60 feet from its targets, and does its work from the rear, pelting key opponents with Psychic Bolts. It attacks with its gythka only when an enemy blitzes it.
Once per day, as an action, the thri-kreen mystic can cast invisibility on itself. Because of the time cost, I don’t think it lends itself well to disappearing and reappearing in the middle of combat; the thri-kreen mystic could use that action to deal as much damage in one round as a thri-kreen hunter can deal over two. Using it to disappear when it seems like a good moment to leave strikes me as a wiser application of invisibility, but there’s one other use case: as part of an initial ambush.
The thri-kreen mystic also has the levitate spell, which it can cast at will, but both levitate and invisibility require its concentration; it can’t sustain both at once. And levitate is no good for an ambush, because there’s nothing to hide behind up in the air. That being said, the thri-kreen mystic’s Stealth skill is just as good as that of the thri-kreen hunter and better than that of the ordinary thri-kreen, and it shares the Chameleon Carapace that they all possess, so there’s no particular need for it to be invisible as well—not if it’s going to take part in the initial attack along with all the rest.
I’d say, therefore, that a thri-kreen mystic doesn’t begin a combat encounter invisible unless it’s by itself, trying to hide in plain sight rather than behind natural cover such as tall grass or a sand dune. Instead, it saves invisibility for when it’s ready to turn tail. If it’s by itself, it retreats when it’s moderately wounded (reduced to 69 hp or fewer); if it’s accompanied by allies, it retreats when the whole group does, or when it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 39 hp or fewer).
As for levitate, well, that spell also costs an action, and once the thri-kreen mystic is engaged in melee by more than one opponent, it’s already a bit late for that. It has to pay attention to what its opponents are doing and cast levitate as soon as it sees them coming toward it; preferably, it has a couple of allies to run interference for it. Levitating makes it an arrow magnet, but it was going to be one anyway, probably.
Freedom of movement doesn’t require concentration, and the thri-kreen mystic needs it for traversing difficult terrain at full speed. Unless it’s caught by surprise, assume that it has this spell pre-cast as part of its combat preparations.
That leaves Drain Vitality, an action the thri-kreen mystic gets to take exactly once per encounter. Its range falls short of how far from its opponents it would prefer to be, and it only achieves its full value when the thri-kreen mystic is wounded, which suggest to me that its chief use is as a defensive measure. The catch is that it hinges on a Constitution saving throw, and there’s a good chance that an enemy who charges the thri-kreen mystic to engage it in melee is a front-liner with higher Con, possibly with proficiency in that saving throw as well. Against a fighter or a barbarian, the mystic has to assume that Drain Vitality isn’t going to deal full damage; against a rogue or a monk, the chance of a failed save is much better. Rangers and paladins fall somewhere in the middle.
Drain Vitality deals an average of 32 damage on a failed save and 16 damage on a success. It also restores hit points equal to the damage dealt, and we don’t want to overfill the thri-kreen mystic’s bucket. Instead of looking at the mean, then, let’s look at how many hit points it can expect Drain Vitality to restore two-thirds of the time. This threshold raises the greatest damage likely to be dealt on a failed save to 35 and the greatest damage likely to be dealt on a success to 17 (since it’s rounded down). If you want to play it even safer, you can use a 90 percent threshold, in which case the greatest likely amounts are 42 and 21.
To make the math super-simple, though, let’s use 39 and 19, because subtracting those from the thri-kreen mystic’s maximum of 99 hit points means we get a nice, round 60 and 80, and splitting the difference between those gives us a nice, round 70. There’s our trigger condition, all wrapped up with a pretty bow on top: The thri-kreen mystic uses Drain Vitality when it’s reduced to 80 hp or fewer if it’s being attacked by a fighter or barbie; 70 hp or fewer if it’s attacked by a ranger or pally; and 60 hp or fewer if it’s attacked by a monk or rogue. If it’s attacked by, say, a barbie and a rogue, it uses the lower hit point threshold (which it will probably reach quickly, since it’s being double-teamed) and targets the lower-Con enemy.
The thri-kreen gladiator’s name suggests a tanky fighter, but like other thri-kreen, this one is still very much a shock attacker, with exceptional Strength and Dex and slightly lower Con. Unlike other thri-kreen, however, the gladiator isn’t stealthy, nor does it have Chameleon Carapace to blend into its surroundings with. This thri-kreen is a defender, not a raider.
It’s not a complicated fighter. Its Multiattack is narrowly defined: two Gythka attacks, one Chatkcha attack. When it first attacks, it throws its chatkcha before closing the distance and engaging in melee with its gythka. Once it’s engaged in melee, the order doesn’t matter. Or does it?
The thri-kreen gladiator has a Parry reaction that raises its Armor Class by 3 against one attack. It also has a very cool feature in both of its attacks, which is that it gains advantage on its attack rolls if it’s been wounded at all, even by a single hit point. And like the thri-kreen hunter, it can Leap as a bonus action.
Right off the bat, I can think of two ways to exploit these features.
One is that a wounded thri-kreen gladiator can simply remain at close range, make two Gythka attacks with advantage and fling a chatkcha—either at its melee opponent or at anyone else it feels like targeting—without disadvantage on the ranged attack roll, because advantage from being wounded cancels it out. However, this approach is more brute than shock attacker. There’s also a cooler one to consider.
Here’s the cooler one: Counting on its natural armor to protect it—and Parry if that armor isn’t quite enough—the wounded thri-kreen gladiator can Leap into the air as a bonus action, baiting out an opportunity attack; fling its chatkcha from up in the air, with advantage; make an Acrobatics or Athletics roll to land on its feet without taking damage; and then attack twice with its gythka!
If the “land on its feet without taking damage” part feels cheesy to you, fine; you can also have the thri-kreen gladiator make its gythka attacks first, then leap away, horizontally, flinging its chatkcha when it’s out of close combat range.
Either way, once it’s baited out the opportunity attack, the opponent no longer has a reaction, so the thri-kreen gladiator can use its movement to run around freely, either staying out of its foe’s reach (quintessential shock attacker behavior) or making them chase it around the battlefield. Since thri-kreen can be any alignment now, it’s up to you how fair you think this duelist should play. It might, for instance, leap over a hidden pit, luring its pursuer across it—and into it. (The old chaotic neutral thri-kreen wouldn’t hesitate to pull a dirty trick like that.)
While the thri-kreen gladiator’s Multiattack is a potent combination, let’s not overlook those excellent Acrobatics and Athletics modifiers. The thri-kreen gladiator can’t substitute a grapple or shove for any of the weapon attacks in its Multiattack, but two working together can use one action each to shove an enemy prone, then grapple them, executing a pin that the enemy can’t get up from—and then clobber them into unconsciousness. If a band of thri-kreen are looking to take a high-value prisoner, gladiators are the ones to do it.
Trained for battle, thri-kreen gladiators are willing to keep fighting longer than a prudent self-preservation instinct might recommend: they don’t give up until they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 56 hp or fewer). At that point, if they’re not in a kill-or-be-killed situation, they concede defeat and surrender, talking terms via telepathy.
Next: <monster_truck_announcer_voice>MEGAPEDES!</monster_truck_announcer_voice>
