## Ssurran Tactics


We now turn to the postapocalyptic desert world of Athas, homeworld of the second edition Dark Sun setting. It’s a world defiled by reckless use of magic, where metal is scarce, fierce monsters roam, and the gods are silent. It’s also mentioned nowhere in the fifth edition Spelljammer box set, yet many creatures of Athas have been repurposed for this product (including the gaj, which I’ve already looked at, unaware at the time that it originally came from Dark Sun).
On Athas, ssurrans are reptilian nomads, sometimes traders, sometimes raiders and sometimes scavengers, who live and wander in tribes. In Boo’s Astral Menagerie, they’re recharacterized as desert- and Wildspace-adapted lizardfolk. Boo’s presents stats for two types of ssurran: the ssurran poisoner and the ssurran defiler.

Ssurran poisoners can walk and swim, as one would expect from a desert folk. (OK, in this case, the “swimming” speed is clearly intended for zero-gravity use only. If a ssurran encountered a body of water, I would not for a single moment expect it to jump in and go all Michael Phelps.) Their ability contour is that of a melee brute, with “peaks” in Strength and Constitution, although I must note that it’s an extremely flat contour overall—mechanically, these two abilities, in which ssurran poisoners have scores of 13, are indistinct from their Dexterity, Intelligence and Wisdom, in which they have scores of 12. You could probably have ssurran poisoners fight any way you want, but I’m going to stick with the brute combat role, because it’s simple and fits their attack actions.
A ssurran poisoner can attack once on its turn with a poisoned javelin or twice with its claws. One Javelin attack and two Claw attacks deal exactly the same amount of expected damage, but the damage types differ: Claw deals slashing damage, while Javelin’s damage is divided 50/50 between piercing and poison. According to lore (not, let it be noted, according to Boo’s), ssurrans are disorganized fighters, but their Intelligence and Wisdom scores suggest that they’re actually pretty good at planning and coordinating attacks, that they know how to adapt to different situations and that they choose their targets carefully. Therefore, I’d expect them to know that dwarves are hard to poison, for instance, and thus to attack dwarves with their claws, not with their javelins.
Ssurran poisoners also have the Poison Bomb action, a grenade that deals damage over a spherical area with a 10-foot radius. Interestingly, instead of following the usual recharge mechanic, Poison Bomb stipulates that if a d6 die roll doesn’t come up 5 or 6, the action is no longer available—the ssurran poisoner has run out of bombs. On average, this means any given ssurran poisoner will get to throw 1½ bombs (∑n=0 1/3n = 3/2). If you’re running an assault by a mob of ssurran poisoners, as a shortcut, you can have all of them throw their bombs in round 1, then have half of them throw bombs in round 2, and leave it at that. In my opinion, this method is better than having all of them throw bombs in round 1, one-third of them throw bombs in round 2, one-ninth of them throw bombs in round 3, etc., for a couple of reasons. First, less math. Second, timing: In round 1, all the ssurrans hang back and throw bombs. In round 2, those who are throwing throw, then the rest charge, so there’s no collateral damage from bomb-happy ssurrans hucking grenades where their allies are fighting.
These comparisons give us a nice plan of attack for a group of ssurran poisoner raiders. In round 1, they approach within 60 feet of where they want to lob their bombs, then let ’em fly, with each bomb aimed at a point where the blast will reach at least two enemies (per “Targets in Area of Effect,” chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide—the more targets, the better, of course). In round 2, half of them throw bombs again, following the same targeting criterion, while the rest advance 30 feet and throw javelins. In round 3, they all advance; those who threw a second bomb now throw javelins, while those who threw javelins engage enemies with their claws or use their javelins to stab, whichever seems like a better idea.
Another way to play it is to make use of the ssurran poisoners’ proficiency in Perception and Stealth, the ambush attack combination. If the landscape allows a group of ssurran poisoners to hide and lie in wait, they can take advantage of their concealment to attack when enemies come within 90 feet of them. In this case, they begin with a volley of hurled javelins, disadvantage from throwing the weapons at long range being canceled out by advantage from attacking unseen. Next, they advance 30 feet and throw their bombs; from here, things proceed as above. This attack commences at a range of 90 feet, not 120 feet, to avoid having a “dead round” in between the first volley of javelins and the volley of bombs during which the ssurrans would have disadvantage on their attack rolls, throwing javelins at long range without the compensatory benefit of doing so from hiding.
Ssurran poisoners out looking for a fight can be assumed to have some discipline and remain engaged until they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 8 hp or fewer), wherepon they’ll Dash away. Those attack unprovoked will run when moderately wounded (reduced to 15 hp or fewer).
Ssurran defilers are psionic support spellcasters with a stronger but more mechanistic plan of attack. First, unlike the ssurran poisoner, they don’t have a ranged attack option—but they do have one use per day of invisibility. Therefore, while lying in wait with their ssurran poisoner allies, they do so invisibly, and while their allies advance, they do as well, remaining invisible as they go. Only once they’re within reach of their enemies do they appear and begin hacking away. Second, they have Defile, an area-effect ability centered on themselves, whose 10-foot radius calls for them to use it against at least two enemies—again, the more, the better, so it behooves them to get close to as many enemies as possible.
Once they’re in position, they pop their Multiattack: two Claw attacks, plus Defile. I’d do this in the opposite order, because while the save DC of Defile is frankly pitiful, the damage it deals on a failed saving throw is substantial and might cause one or more enemies to drop all by itself, especially when those enemies have been softened up by Poison Bombs already. Afterward, the ssurran defiler can look around and see who within reach needs to be injured some more.
But wait, you may be thinking, shouldn’t the ssurran defiler wait until it’s injured to use Defile, so that it can benefit from the hit points it regains from opponents who fail their saves? After all, since it only recharges on a 6, there probably won’t be a second chance to use it; may as well get the greatest possible benefit out of it, right? Well, given that getting the most out of Defile means running headlong into a crowd of enemies, the only sensible course of action is to deal as much damage to all of them as possible, as fast as possible—preferably before they realize you’re there. Besides, with a save DC of only 11, there’s a real chance that no opponent will fail, and the ssurran defiler won’t get any hit points back anyway. (There’s also the ambiguous way Multiattack is written, which seems to imply that if Defile is available, the ssurran defiler must always use it as part of its Multiattack—that it doesn’t have the option to attack twice with its claws and not use Defile if the latter ability isn’t on cooldown. Generally, Multiattack doesn’t work like that: You can always opt to forgo one of the attacks it includes, if for no other reason than that you might run out of enemies mid-action. Whichever way you read it, I think the “hurt as many opponents as possible as fast as possible” argument is the weightier one, anyway.)
Ssurran defilers follow the same rules concerning when and how to retreat as ssurran poisoners. Their threshold for being seriously wounded is 20 hp or fewer; for being moderately wounded, 36 hp or fewer.
Next: thri-kreen.
