## Scavver Tactics


Scavvers are good old-fashioned monstrosities, not hostile per se but interested solely in their next meal, and the next, and the next. They come in four varieties: in ascending order of strength, the gray scavver, brown scavver, night scavver and void scavver. Unfortunately, once again, their stat blocks include nothing that’s tactically interesting. They’re brutes. They chomp. That’s all there is.
Strength is the primary offensive ability of all scavvers, and Constitution is their primary defensive ability. Their Intelligence and Charisma are rock-bottom, and their Dexterity and Wisdom are somewhere in between. The humanoid-average Wisdom of gray, brown and night scavvers means they know when to flee a combat encounter but are indiscriminate in choosing targets. Void scavvers are better at choosing targets—preferring the young, the old, the weak, the isolated and the oblivious—and will avoid groups that are clearly too much for them to take on, but their rock-bottom Intelligence means that what’s clear to most people probably won’t be clear to them until they’ve already engaged. All scavvers operate purely from instinct and are primarily interested in an easy meal, so they’re not hard to drive off. They’ll retreat when only moderately wounded, which for a gray scavver means being reduced to 13 hp or fewer, for a brown scavver means being reduced to 35 hp or fewer, for a night scavver means being reduced to 79 hp or fewer, and for a void scavver means being reduced to 109 hp or fewer.
Night scavvers and void scavvers have proficiency in Perception and expertise in Stealth, indicating that they seek to ambush their prey rather than saunter right up and monch. Wait—how do you ambush someone in wide-open, featureless space? Well, the Astral Sea may be a swirling, misty expanse of silvery gray, but Wildspace looks like … space. It’s pitch-dark, an expanse of black velvet sprinkled with countless motes of light, and night scavvers’ and void scavvers’ coloration offers them camouflage against this backdrop. While this adaptation may grant them a surprise round in combat and even give them a free unseen attack with advantage, that’s all it does for them.

Void scavvers have a bonus action, Ray of Fear, whose primary function is to prevent prey from effectively fighting back. Because it’s a bonus action rather than an action, they use it reflexively whenever it’s available, and because it recharges on a roll of 4–6, it’s available every other round, on average. The only decision to make is whom to target with it, and given the void scavver’s limited Intelligence, the heuristic is simple: whoever within range has dealt the most damage to the scavver since its last turn.
In short, scavvers are not interesting foes. Most of the time, they’re nothing but a hazard. A better way to use them is as a complication when the player characters are already in a tense encounter with some other adversary.
Next: lunar and solar dragons.
