## Spelljammer Githyanki Tactics


As popular as githyanki seem to be, the fact that they’re native to the Astral Plane has always demanded some contortions when introducing them as adversaries on the Prime Material. Send your player characters into spaaaaace, however, and that’s no longer an issue. Wildspace, where the astral and the material overlap, is the perfect place for githyanki pirates to go hunting for fish out of water. If the PCs venture all the way out into the Astral Sea, they’re on githyanki turf.
Based on their name, I’d hope that githyanki buccaneers would have some sort of ability that would make them uniquely good pirates. I don’t see that this is the case, though; they have the same challenge rating as githyanki warriors, and aside from having a ranged attack, they’re ultimately not all that different.
Githyanki buccaneers’ ability scores are slightly better than githyanki warriors’, a fact that’s offset by their slightly lower Armor Class (they wear AC 16 breastplates instead of AC 17 half plate). A higher Constitution, which matches their Dexterity, gives them the option of staying engaged in melee rather than moving fast, hitting hard and getting out. But they don’t have to engage in melee at all, since they have Telekinetic Bolt, i.e., mind lasers.

In case my incessant cracks about it haven’t made it clear by now, I despise the Monsters of the Multiverse–era turn toward giving spellcasting creatures generic ranged spell attacks. Magic should be magical, and using it to merely Subtract Points From a Distance is unbearably prosaic, not to mention distinctly video-gamey. Granted, in some stat blocks, these new ranged spell attacks are clearly streamlined substitutes for spells that creatures from Volo’s Guide to Monsters or Mordenkainen’s Tome of Foes used to cast, and I don’t mind them so much when that’s the case. But it feels to me like Dungeons & Dragons’ designers, having added this tool to their kit, are relying on it way too heavily and doing way too little to preserve the flavor of fantasy when they use it. A “Telekinetic Bolt” should at least move something besides “force.”
Anyway, the upshot of Telekinetic Bolt for the githyanki buccaneer is that, in distinctly un-swashbuckling fashion, their best combat tactic is to crouch behind cover and think hurtful thoughts at their opponents until they fall down. Seriously, why would they willingly wade into melee? TK Bolt deals as much damage as their Greatsword attack does, and taking three-quarters cover increases their Armor Class and Dexterity saving throws by 5. Players are going to loathe this tactic, and rightly so. It’s cheesy, unsporting and boring.
I strongly recommend that you do one of two things:

Open your copy of Boo’s Astral Menagerie, pick up a Sharpie and cross off Telekinetic Bolt.
Alternatively, keep Telekinetic Bolt in pocket, but use it only when it’s the PCs who are engaging in cheese tactics, to make them quit hanging back like cowards and get them to advance into melee reach.

Because really, melee is where the githyanki buccaneers belong. They carry greatswords, for crying out loud. You don’t bring those to a sniper duel. Moreover, melee combat offers interesting tactical synergy with the buccaneers’ psionic spellcasting and Astral Step bonus action. Astral Step is for getting into reach of enemies who don’t want to be in melee and out of reach of those who are dealing a little too much damage back. Telekinesis can hoist a foe into midair and hold them there, restrained, for use as a training dummy. In ship-to-ship combat, it’s also useful for forcing a foe off the deck of their ship and into the zone of wibbly-wobbly gravity beyond—or past the edge of the ship’s atmospheric envelope, so that they get left behind. As I mentioned above, Astral Space is githyanki home turf, so unlike most creatures with plane shift, they have little reason to use it as a method of escape; they’re better off using it to punch their enemies into other dimensions, which is yet another reason for them to get into melee (and another way of dealing with front-line enemies who fight back too effectively).
Githyanki buccaneers are basically bandits, which means they’re opportunistic. Most of the time, when all members of a raiding team are moderately wounded (reduced to 40 hp or fewer), or when at least a third of them are seriously wounded (reduced to 23 hp or fewer), they’ll back off, Disengaging and withdrawing. Only when they’re sent on some sort of high-priority mission will they risk their lives any further than that, retreating when they’re all seriously wounded or at least a third of them are dead.
Githyanki star seers are warlocks, and eldritch blast has always essentially been a mage laser to begin with, so Astral Bolt feels slightly less cheesy in their case. However, the fact that they have a high Constitution, versus a merely average Dexterity, introduces some confusion about what, exactly, their combat role is supposed to be. They don’t need to remain at a distance, but they have no melee attack, and their only touch-required offensive spell is one daily use of plane shift.
To me, a mental primary offensive ability combined with Constitution as primary defensive ability reads as “support.” What kind of support can a githyanki star seer offer? I see a few possibilities:

Detect magic. Usually, this spell ends up being a throwaway in an enemy creature’s repertoire, because it doesn’t have a direct combat application. But since a githyanki star seer’s role as a combatant is unclear, why not have it lead off with this spell and call out to its allies which of their opponents are carrying magic weapons or other magic items that could affect a battle’s outcome, so that they can focus on neutralizing that enemy?
Telekinesis. A githyanki star seer can handle the grabbing of an enemy, leaving githyanki buccaneers free to use their actions to whale on them.
Intelligence 19. The githyanki star seer is a shot caller, rapidly identifying its opponents’ weaknesses and telling its allies how to capitalize on them.

Most likely, though, the main kind of support a githyanki star seer will provide its allies is fire support. Astral Bolt isn’t interesting, but it’s strong, and the star seer’s Multiattack gives it three bolts per action. Invisibility and Astral Step allow it to stay more than 5 feet away from anyone it wants to blast, and the each casting of the former gives it advantage on one subsequent attack roll, as long as its target can’t see invisible creatures. Mage armor plus three-quarters cover gives them AC 18, which is most satisfactory.
Githyanki star seers are keenly interested in preserving their own lives. When they’re moderately wounded (reduced to 77 hp or fewer), they’ll turn invisible and never reappear—unless they’re on an important mission, in which case they’ll hold out until they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 44 hp or fewer) out of a sense of duty.
The githyanki xenomancer is more interesting—and more coherent. Its primary offensive ability is Wisdom, its primary defensive ability Dexterity, but its Constitution is very high as well, making it a spellslinger that can also function as a skirmisher in a pinch. And Astral Step is a nice ability for a skirmisher to have.
The xenomancer’s staff is a Strength-based weapon, not Dex-based, and its Strength falls quite a bit short of its Dex. However, it doesn’t carry a shield, so it can eke out an extra point of average damage by wielding its staff two-handed. Its preferred attack, though, is its ranged Telekinetic Bolt, which for the love of all that’s holy please needs some kind of flavoring to make it something other than a mind laser. Given a choice, it positions itself 40 to 60 feet away from its opponents, but if engaged in melee, it’s happy to take a few whacks with its staff before Astral Stepping away—unless its foe is heavily armored, in which case it Astral Steps first, then shoots Telekinetic Bolts for the higher chance to hit. If Astral Step is on cooldown when a xenomancer is attacked by a formidable front-liner, it may forgo its Multiattack in order to try the plane shift trick; if that’s no longer available, and standing its ground seems unwise, it turns invisible long enough to reposition more favorably.
The flavor text describes the githyanki xenomancer as, essentially, a poacher of exotic animals, and these seem to be the primary intended applications of pass without trace (to sneak up on them), forcecage (to trap them) and dominate monster (to calm them down). However, these all have their uses in ship-to-ship combat as well. The combination of Pass without trace and or invisibility lets a githyanki xenomancer make a commando incursion onto an enemy ship and move about undetected in search of the spelljammer helm. Dominate monster can be used to force the current occupant to transfer control of the helm to the xenomancer, which can then cast forcecage in the shape of a solid box around itself, offering total protection from attacks and foiling any and all efforts to reach the helm for the next hour. If the githyanki’s opponents are too closely clustered, forcecage can also be used to imprison them, giving a boarding party an hour to do its work unimpeded.
Like githyanki star seers, githyanki xenomancers that are moderately wounded (reduced to 109 hp or fewer) turn invisible and don’t reappear, unless they’re on a mission, in which case they wait until they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 62 hp or fewer) to vanish.
Next: reigar, by request.
