## Spelljammer Neogi Tactics


Neogi are odious, reactionary little blighters, would-be tyrants that are an absolute delight to obliterate. Three varieties—the basic neogi, the neogi master and the neogi hatchling—appear in Mordenkainen’s Tome of Foes (with their Monsters of the Multiverse updates, only the neogi master’s tactics change significantly). Boo’s Astral Menagerie introduces three more, but one of the three is simply a swarm of hatchlings.
As you might expect, there’s not much to the tactics of the neogi hatchling swarm. Swarms have to move into the same space as their targets to attack, and this one is no exception. There are only two questions to answer here: What does the intersection of their low Intelligence and their skirmisher-profile ability contour (their highest ability scores are Constitution and Dexterity) tell us about their combat behavior, and when and how does the swarm flee?

Having Intelligence of only 6 means that a neogi hatchling swarm is entirely instinct-driven—but having the ability contour of a skirmisher means that those instincts may include moving from one target to another. When, though? To answer that question, we can look at the swarm’s damage resistances. Physical damage, even from a magical weapon, is reduced by half. As long as that’s all a swarm is taking, it’s happy to keep munching on its first target—which is probably the nearest, since its humanoid-average Wisdom tells us it’s indiscriminate in its target selection. But as soon as its target deals some other kind of damage to it—fire, cold, necrotic, what have you—it reacts by moving away, most likely incurring one or more opportunity attacks, and picking on what it hopes will be an easier target instead.
Solo neogi hatchlings fight only in self-defense. Being in a swarm emboldens them, but as soon as the swarm is reduced to half its maximum hit points or fewer—the point at which the damage it’s able to do drops by half as well—it Dashes away, using Spider Climb to make its way up the wall and across the ceiling, if need be, toward the nearest crevice.
Neogi pirates are basic neogi with a handful of minor differences: slightly lower Dex (15 instead of 16), proficiency in Stealth in lieu of Intimidation and no Enslave action. Enslaving other creatures is the whole point of combat for most neogi; without this action in their stat block, we have to look for a different purpose for neogi pirates, and we find it in the Astral Adventurer’s Guide’s description of the nightspider ship: “These vessels often wait in ambush for other ships. Once a target ship is identified, the neogi try to steal its spelljamming helm and capture its crew.” Presumably, the captured crew are hauled off somewhere to be enslaved by other neogi.
Standard neogi’s power comes from their psychic abilities, but neogi pirates don’t have any, at least none that they can use offensively. Their high Dexterity and Constitution and low Strength indicate a preference for skirmishing and for outnumbering opponents, and indeed, the AAG says a typical nightspider is crewed by 19 neogi, plus several umber hulks. (Previously, I noted that neogi of equal status will cooperate only under the command of a higher-status neogi. Take out all the officers on board a neogi ship, and the crew will descend into a free-for-all battle royal, with each and every neogi striving to be the one that comes out on top.)
A nightspider ship is armed with a mangonel and several ballistae. Since neogi pirates are interested in the helm first, the crew second and the ship last if at all, a sound battle strategy for neogi is to lie in wait in the dark of Wildspace, perpendicular to a well-used travel route; wait for a prize to cruise by; launch an all-out attack from below, 120 feet away, with the nightspider’s siege weaponry; then approach until the ships’ gravity planes intersect. When that happens, the ship with more hit points—ideally, the nightspider—imposes its definition of gravity on the other, causing the prize’s crew to tumble overboard, while neogi pirates launch themselves at the prize ship and use their Spider Climb trait to skitter around on its deck and hull.
OK, but what about the umber hulks? They sound like a great idea, but they introduce some inconvenient complications. For one thing, they don’t have Spider Climb, nor any climbing movement at all. How are they supposed to maneuver on the prize ship? Second, there’s nothing in the neogi pirate stat block to indicate that it’s in any way immune to an umber hulk’s Confusing Gaze. The Mental Fortitude trait confers advantage on saving throws against being charmed or frightened, but Confusing Gaze, as written, doesn’t impose either of those conditions; a target’s confused behavior is a direct effect of being able to see an umber hulk’s eyes. So, what, do neogi keep blinders on their umber hulks’ faces and special eye-covering caps on their heads, which they pull off only when they’re ready to launch an assault? With Intelligence 9 and a language of their own, umber hulks are indisputably sapient; there’s no way they’d put up with that.
There’s a lot of handwaving needed to make this partnership work, such as construing Mental Fortitude to protect against Confusing Gaze as well, issuing ropes and grappling hooks to the umber hulks (they’ll have +5 on their Athletics checks, so that’s something), and reasoning that a creature that can burrow through solid rock can just as easily burrow directly through the wooden or chitinous hull of a spacefaring ship if it can get a clawhold. (Also, there’s no way to house more than one umber hulk in the nightspider’s umber hulk pen. They’ve gotta live in the upper cargo hold.) Once you’ve made these choices, it becomes obvious that the umber hulks are the ones to send after the spelljamming helm: they can overpower its occupant, then pick it up and carry it off.
Any individual neogi pirate withdraws when it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 13 hp or fewer), but all of them withdraw when more than half of their number have fled. Counting each umber hulk as two creatures, a neogi pirate crew abandons its effort to capture a ship when it no longer outnumbers its intended victims by at least 2 to 1. If they’ve fallen into disarray because of the loss of their leadership, they yield rather than fight to the death or run away; even if they don’t manage to come out on top, they may still come out ahead of somebody.
As the neogi pirate is to the basic neogi, the neogi void hunter is to the neogi master. The void hunter has fewer hit points than the Multiverse neogi master, a slightly lower Armor Class, no at-will spells, and no hold person or hunger of Hadar, but it compensates with proficiency in Charisma saves, an extra Claw in its Multiattack and an Eldritch Bolt attack that deals more damage than Tentacle of Hadar.
Unfortunately for the void hunter, the loss of hunger of Hadar makes its Devil’s Sight far less advantageous, since it no longer has any way to create magical darkness. Instead, it relies on Eldritch Bolt attacks as long as it’s at a distance, then switches to melee attacks after closing in. It gets only one Enslave bonus action, which it uses on the opponent with the lowest Wisdom saving throw modifier among those it can see. (It doesn’t just know who’s got the lowest Wisdom save mod; it has to be able to observe them for a couple of rounds.) If Enslave succeeds, this opponent becomes the neogi void hunter’s special captive, and it immediately orders them back to its quarters (room 10 on the nightspider’s main deck) to get them out of the way and keep them segregated from other captives.
On top of its own self-preservation instinct, the captain of a neogi ship is well aware that its own demise will cause its crew to fall into chaos. Thus, when it’s moderately wounded (reduced to 40 hp or fewer), it Disengages and backs up, calls for a temporary cessation of hostilities, and informs its foes that further bloodshed can be avoided if they surrender. Whether it relies in Deception, Intimidation or Persuasion to accomplish this is up to you, although I personally think that Intimidation is the most quintessentially neogi way to do it.
Speaking of which, it seems like a good moment to recap my recommendation of how to handle using social skills against player characters, since ultimately players are in charge of their PCs’ thoughts, feelings and choices. When a monster or NPC employs Deception or Intimidation, roll an ability check contested by the target PC’s Wisdom (Insight). If the monster or NPC wins the contest, tell the player that whatever the character or creature wants the PC to believe is true—not that the PC believes it’s true, but that it is true, presenting the fiction as fact. The player believes it, because you, the DM, said so, and they can then have the PC respond or react to that knowledge however they see fit. In contrast, if the PC wins the contest, you let the player in on the charade.
When the opposing character or creature uses Persuasion, it’s trickier. In this case, a lost contest would mean the PC’s judgment is overwhelmed by the argument, which you can convey by making the argument your argument, reiterating the logos, ethos, and pathos of the appeal as incontestable truths. If the PC’s Insight prevails, present the actual facts of the situation instead. In the case of a strong argument, that means reiterating just how strong it is, but in the case of a weak one, it reveals the weaknesses.
Anyway, if talk fails, the neogi void hunter casts invisibility and withdraws back to its own ship, letting its crew finish the job, to whatever extent they can. It casts dimension door and teleports directly to the nightspider’s bridge if it’s intercepted along the way.
Next: neh-thalggu.
