## Vargouille Reflection Tactics


Vargouilles are a nasty plague metaphor, flitting indiscriminately from victim to victim and spreading their curse far and wide. Vargouille reflections are much the same, with the key difference that they spread their curse not by kissing their victims but by … what? There’s something missing in this stat block, and I’m wondering whether it got edited out by accident.
For all its silliness, the basic vargouille is elegantly designed. It uses an ability called Stunning Shriek to frighten targets in an area. While frightened, they’re stunned. A stunned creature is, by definition, incapacitated. That incapacitation sets the creature up to be cursed by the vargouille’s Kiss.
Now let’s look at the vargouille reflection. In lieu of Stunning Shriek, it has Horrific Reflection, with which it morphs into a duplicate of the humanoid face it’s staring into. On a failed Wisdom saving throw, the target takes psychic damage and is frightened for an hour. In lieu of Kiss, the vargouille reflection has Abyssal Curse, which targets an incapacitated humanoid; on a failed Charisma save, the curse is transmitted to the target.
But there’s a missing rung on the ladder, a missing link in the chain. The frightened target of Horrific Reflection isn’t incapacitated. Nowhere in the vargouille reflection stat block is there anything about incapacitation.

There are two possible conclusions to draw. One is that the vargouille reflection is meant to appear only in the company of a flock of basic vargouilles. The other is that the vargouille reflection is simply broken. The latter conclusion is depressing, but the fix isn’t difficult: Simply borrow the language from the basic vargouille stat block that states, “While frightened in this way, a target is stunned.”
Aside from this apparent oversight, there’s one other thing to note in the vargouille reflection’s stat block: its better-than-pitiful Wisdom. (It’s also less stupid than the basic vargouille, but not enough to matter.) This improved Wisdom score heightens its self-preservation instinct. A basic vargouille is pretty quick to flee anyway, since it doesn’t like it when victims fight back, but a vargouille reflection has just enough common sense to Disengage before fleeing when it’s within melee reach of more than one opponent. Otherwise, its battle plan is the same as that of a basic vargouille.
Next: maelephants. (Spoiler: They’re not just evil hollyphants.)
