## Priest of Osybus Tactics


Digging into fan theories about the priests of Osybus leads to a lot of complaints that they make no sense and don’t fit into canon lore. Specifically, players argue that they’re incompatible with the storyline of Curse of Strahd, in which the name “Osybus” first appears, and that the flavor text in Ezmerelda’s Guide to Ravenloft, which stipulates that Strahd von Zarovich took an active role in the defeat of Osybus the lich, is inconsistent with both Strahd’s personality and the difference in their respective power levels. They also note that it makes little sense that Osybus’s followers now seek to set his former enemy free to ravage the multiverse when it was he who helped imprison Strahd in the first place.
These players have clearly given the matter a lot more thought than I have, and I can find neither compelling evidence that they’re wrong nor a tidy workaround, other than severing Osybus from the Ravenloft story altogether. Take the first three paragraphs of flavor text as written, and make up whatever you want from there. You don’t even need to keep the name “Osybus” if you don’t want to, although I think it has a neat ring to it. It makes me think of the pantheon of ancient Egypt—which is probably just my brain conflating Osybus with Osiris.

Priests of Osybus are short-range spellcasters, built to absorb damage rather than having to avoid it. They’re proficient in all saving throws based on mental abilities, providing solid defense against magical manipulation but leaving them a bit underresourced when it comes to, say, dodging fireballs and lightning bolts. They have 120 feet of darkvision, suiting them well to a catacomb-centric lifestyle; they’ll never willingly confront a foe under broad daylight.
Their Tattoo of Osybus trait gives them a zombielike resilience, with unpredictable side effects drawn from the Boons of Undeath table. While a challenge rating of 6 makes one a good solo enemy around level 4, priests of Osybus are far more entertaining foes at levels 10 to 15, when you can comfortably throw several of them at a party of player characters at once. That way, when they’re reduced to 0 hp and pop back up, they’re all doing different things. Variety is good.
Two Boons of Undeath, Dread and Ectoplasmic, create harmful auras that give a reanimated priest of Osybus an additional incentive to get close to as many opponents as possible. One, Vampiric, incentivizes them to lean more heavily on their Necrotic Bolt attack, which has a greater chance of hitting and deals more damage, in order to keep itself in the fight longer. One, Spectral, lets them chase opponents through walls. One, Deathly, allows them to cast circle of death as a recharge ability, which is incredibly nasty. The remaining Boon of Undeath, Blazing, simply turns them into something else. It’s possible to keep a priest of Osybus from popping back up by destroying the Tattoo of Osybus before their turn comes around, but the window of opportunity is narrow, and an opponent has to deal 15 damage or more to the tattoo on their own turn, or the counter resets.
It’s easy to miss, but the Soul Tattoo bonus action is unavailable until a priest of Osybus creates a Soul Tattoo on their own body by reducing a Medium or smaller enemy to 0 hp with its Soul Blade attack. (Priests of Osybus are exceptionally smart and very forward-looking, however, and might keep some chained prisoners around for the sole purpose of stabbing them and turning them into Soul Tattoos.) Soul Tattoo is a no-brainer: It’s a bonus action, so a priest of Osybus doesn’t have to use it at the expense of Multiattack or any other action. The recharge merely prevents the priest from keeping lots of prisoners around and being able to reliably turn one into a shadow every single round.
Still, it’s worth remembering that priests of Osybus are spellcasters, after all, not melee fighters. They prefer to keep a little distance from their foes and, ideally, to have allies in between. If several priests of Osybus are attacked, one serves as the sacrificial lamb, taking point against any advancing melee opponents while the other priests hang back about 15 feet. (That’s the optimal positioning, but they’ll stand 5 to 10 feet back if there isn’t room.)
Soul Blade doesn’t deal a lot of damage: Especially at tier 3, 7 damage on a hit is barely more than a plink. However, a hit also causes automatic paralysis, which is huge. The paralyzed condition can create cascade failure situations for affected creatures even when they get saving throws to end it; in this case, although it lasts only a round, there’s no avoiding it (unless the target is wholly immune to the condition, e.g., under a freedom of movement spell). Unfortunately for the priest, however, the condition ends at the start of their next turn, so they can capitalize on it only once, with the second attack of their Multiattack.
That doesn’t stop other priests of Osybus from capitalizing on it, though! A paralyzing hit with Soul Blade triggers an immediate pile-on, with other priests darting forward to land their own Soul Blade attacks, then retreating to their rearward positions once again (no risk of an opportunity attack from a paralyzed foe). Note also that there’s nothing stopping a priest of Osybus from taking the Soul Tattoo bonus action at the end of its turn: It’s possible for them to reduce a target to 0 hp, suck their soul into a tattoo, then immediately release it as a shadow.
Having at least one shadow on the field relieves the front-line priest from their sacrificial role. They drop back, allowing the shadow to block for them instead. The more shadows on the field, the better, but priests of Osybus don’t get ahead of their own front line for the sake of making more. If they have prisoners behind them whom they can sacrifice to create more shadows, great; they absolutely do that. Otherwise, though, they let the shadows handle melee while they hang back and fire priest lasers—I mean, hurl Necrotic Bolts. Back-line priests of Osybus make Soul Blade attacks only if they get blitzed by a charging melee attacker.
This pattern changes slightly if a priest of Osybus is struck down in combat and revived by the Dread, Ectoplasmic, Vampiric or Spectral Boon of Undeath. In any of these instances, the undead priest takes its place on the front line—or, in the latter two, barges past the front line to assault opponents who are hanging back, particularly spellcasters and marksmen.
An undead priest of Osybus with the Deathly boon doesn’t refrain from casting circle of death simply because it has allies on the field who aren’t resistant to the necrotic damage it deals. Why should it? Their Boons of Undeath make them even more powerful! By serving them up a whopping tranche of damage, the Deathly priest is helping them realize their potential!
As much fun as combat can be for priests of Osybus, they’re prudent enough to choose their battles carefully and fight only when they’re confident that they’ll win. A combat encounter with priests of Osybus should always be Deadly (per “Creating a Combat Encounter,” chapter 3 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide)—or, perhaps better, Hard, but with situational factors that favor the priests, such as total darkness, room to maneuver, architectural features that block light and cast shadows, and the presence of prisoners. (Speaking of architectural features, a priest of Osybus absolutely has the sense to take cover behind a load-bearing column.)
However, as fanatics—not only that, but fanatics who get up again when they’re murdered and are even more powerful that way—priests of Osybus have no motivation to flee a battle. Fighting to the death is what they live for. They’d simply prefer that the death be yours rather than theirs.
Next: Ulmist inquisitors.
