## Dohwar Tactics


Dohwars—or, as I feel like they should have been called, “pengku”—are yet another species of space merchants. Can we, at this point, stipulate that basically every spacefaring folk that aren’t overtly antisocial are, on some level, space merchants? Why are humans venturing into Wildspace if not searching for fantastic money-making opportunities?
Ahem. Anyway. Let’s just put it right out there: Dohwars are bad at combat. Their challenge rating is 0. Since they can’t cast any damaging spell, their primary offensive ability is Dexterity, which powers their unimpressive Bite attack—more like a peck. Whether walking or swimming (is there a lot of water in Wildspace?), their speed is a plodding 20 feet. They’re not going to inflict much damage, and they’re not going to escape if pursued.
What dohwars are—well, not good at, but certainly better at, is avoiding combat. And that’s what their tactics are all about.

Their top ability scores are their high Wisdom and their modestly above-average Charisma, which in turn fuel their skills at Insight, Deception and Persuasion. They also have the ability to cast detect thoughts three times per day. The saving throw DC to resist this spell is a paltry 11, but remember, detect thoughts works on surface thoughts automatically; a saving throw is called for only when the caster tries to probe more deeply.
Simply scanning another creature’s mind to discover their most immediate concern is enough to give dohwars the upper hand by addressing that concern right away—to such an extent, I would argue, that it ought to give them advantage on any check involving the aforementioned skill proficiencies. These fey birbs are no slouches at “getting to yes.” By quickly engaging anyone who might pose a threat in conversation and preemptively expressing an interest in helping them get what they want or need, dohwars deftly steer their thoughts away from fighting and toward striking a deal. Of course, the dohwars might not be able to provide exactly what the other creature is looking for … but that’s where Deception comes in.
It’s worth restating my method of handling social skills when used against player characters, who have free agency when responding to them. In a nutshell, treat it as a contest between the non-player character’s or monster’s Charisma (Deception, Intimidation or Persuasion) check and the PC’s Wisdom (Insight) check. If the PC wins the contest, the Dungeon Master tells the player that the PC sees through the attempt at manipulation, even if the would-be persuader’s premises are true. If the NPC or monster wins the contest, whatever it wants the PC to believe, the DM states as fact, even if it’s false. Because the only way to get players to respond authentically to a successful attempt to manipulate their PCs is to manipulate them—and the DM is in the perfect position to do so!
Dohwars that feel threatened use their telepathic abilities to share information with each other, as well as with any other dohwars in the immediate area, with an all-for-one, one-for-all attitude: Whoever is in the best position to give the potentially threatening creature(s) what they want, or at least to fool them into thinking they’re going to get what they want, steps forward and takes charge of the situation. Any dohwar that senses nascent hostility from another creature tips off the rest of its folk, quickly and silently. They may compete fiercely against one another in the marketplace, but threats to life and limb from other species—especially larger ones—unite them in defense of the group. With their dismal Strength and speed, mobbing their foes, at least three to one, is their only realistic means of survival when push comes to shove.
Even so, they have little appetite for a fight, and they fight only when they’re sure that they can win—or they’re sure that they’ll be killed anyway if they don’t fight. It doesn’t take more than a moderate wound (being reduced to 7 hp or fewer) for any single dohwar to decide it wants no further part of an altercation, at which point it Dashes away—potentially provoking one or more opportunity attacks—and leaves its less wounded fellows to continue the fight.
Next: murder comets.
