## Maelephant Tactics


When I first saw the word “maelephant,” the first thing that came to my mind was to wonder whether it was supposed to be an evil hollyphant. Then I opened up Morte’s Planar Parade, and, uh, no, that’s not what it is at all.
Yeah, they’ve got elephant heads (pantheon preserve me from any more humanoid bodies with animal heads stuck on top of them), but that’s where the resemblance ends. Maelephants are fiends—“typically lawful evil,” so presumably allied with devils, although they’re not tagged as devils themselves—and Large in size. They don’t fly, but they move briskly, with 40 feet of speed. Their ability contour, with its peaks in Strength and Constitution, marks them as brutes, but they also have very high Wisdom, whose primary purposes seem to be fueling their Perception skill and affording them additional resistance against mental manipulation.
They have two melee attacks, Barbed Trunk and Glaive, both with 10 feet of reach, and they can make both types of attacks in a single Multiattack, which implies that when they first engage in melee they don’t approach any nearer than they need to in order to land hits themselves. Foes who want to fight back will have to move in closer of their own volition.

They may not be able to, though. Barbed Trunk includes a rider that imposes the grappled and restrained conditions. Woe to the party of PCs with only one front-line warrior: A hit with Barbed Trunk will lock them down 10 feet away from the maelephant, where they can’t fight back. The maelephant can then follow up with two glaive strikes, with advantage on the rolls. To gain the benefits of this combination, the maelephant always attacks with Barbed Trunk before attempting to hit with its glaive. While it’s using its trunk to grapple, the maelephant can’t use it to attack other creatures, but there’s nothing that says it can’t use its trunk to attack the same creature again.
Mind Poison is a nasty area-effect quasi–breath weapon that not only deals damage and imposes the poisoned condition (read: disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks) but also robs targets of their weapon and skill proficiencies (whaaaaaat?), the ability to cast spells and even the ability to speak! (It imposes disadvantage on Intelligence saving throws as well, but this side effect is negligible unless the maelephant is accompanied by confederates casting illusion spells, or perhaps a glyph of warding or programmed illusion that does the same.) The 60-foot area of effect tells us, per the Dungeon Master’s Guide’s Targets in Area of Effect table (which I’ll continue to take as gospel until a new DMG tells me otherwise), that it uses Mind Poison only when it can surround six opponents—or all of them, if there are fewer than six—in the gas cloud.
However, depending on the location, the shape of Mind Poison’s area of effect may present a complication. It’s an extremely strong ability, and it presents the maelephant with a stellar opportunity: Gas everyone in the area, then run in, grab a debilitated opponent and start whaling on them. The problem is the maelephant’s challenge rating: 10. That CR makes it a solo threat for a party of mid-level adventurers, a boss with minions for high-level adventurers. At tiers 2 and 3, a saving throw DC of 16 isn’t going to be exceptionally hard to beat, especially for a front-liner who’s already got a high Constitution and may also have proficiency on the save.
Here’s what the maelephant doesn’t want to happen: It exhales its Mind Poison, but Allmord the Berserker casually rolls an 18 on the Con save, Rages, charges right up to it and starts hacking at it with his absurdly large axe. With Allmord already inside its 10-foot reach, the maelephant would lose that beautiful position it could have had, getting to slash away at an opponent without fear of reprisal.
It could respond to that situation by striking at Allmord with its trunk, grappling and restraining him, then backing away 5 feet so that Allmord wouldn’t be able to counterattack. That would give Allmord an opportunity attack, though. Granted, Allmord would be restrained, giving him disadvantage on the attack roll (even if he used Reckless Attack on his turn—on the maelephant’s turn, it no longer applies). But with at least +7 or +8 to hit, more if his greataxe is magical, he still has a decent chance of landing that attack: not quite 50/50 (unless, again, magic weapon), but close enough for discomfort. On the other hand, there’s no question that it’s worth it to risk one attack in order to avoid three. But if you don’t even have to risk one, isn’t that best?
Consequently, the maelephant doesn’t want to be too close to the enemy’s front line when it uses Mind Poison. The ideal distance in most cases is 40 feet, but when there’s a barbie in the party, it becomes 50 feet, because of Fast Movement. If Allmord happened to be a wood elf, it would be 55 feet. Yeah, an opponent might decide to Dash in order to get inside the maelephant’s reach, but they’d be forgoing at least two attacks, possibly three, in order to do so. On balance, that’s fine. The important thing is, if the maelephant is any closer, it needs to back up some before using Mind Poison, and if it can’t back up, the benefits of using Mind Poison no longer clearly outweigh the drawbacks. It may as well run up, get its trunk-and-glaive licks in right away, while it can, and save Mind Poison for a more opportune moment.
An important question, though, is whether the maelephant knows it should do that. With a Wisdom of 16, a maelephant is aware how likely it is to prevail in a fight. But with an Intelligence of only 10, it’s not sophisticated in its strategy and tactics. While it can tell when things are going wrong and make adjustments, it’s not as good at telling when things are going to go wrong. So maybe, out of habit, it lets loose that Mind Poison anyway as soon as it’s close enough to gas all its foes, then, when Allmord comes roaring out of the haze, says, “Oh, hmm. Well, I guess that changes things.” Anyway, in general, an ability on a 5–6 Recharge is presumptively awesome, and a creature will use it whenever it has the chance; I don’t see any compelling reason why the maelephant would differ in this respect.
One other thing worth noting: According to the flavor text in Morte’s, maelephants are often found guarding locations or objects. That means that, in many cases, a maelephant can stand its ground, wait for its opponents to come to it first and use its reaction to carry out a Readied action. Since Multiattacks can’t be Readied, that leaves Barbed Trunk, Glaive and Mind Poison. Glaive deals far less damage than Barbed Trunk and doesn’t lock the opponent down, so that’s obviously a distant third choice. Barbed Trunk is better if only one target is approaching, while Mind Poison is better if many come forward at once, but the maelephant doesn’t have the luxury of knowing which of those two situations is going to occur before the throwdown commences.
So I’m going to say it Readies Barbed Trunk, and the triggering condition is that a prospective enemy is 10 feet away and hasn’t stopped moving toward it yet. Because here’s the thing: If six strangers come rushing forward when it has Barbed Trunk Readied, but none of them comes within 10 feet, it can still use Mind Poison against them on its own turn; it’s lost the opportunity to make a preemptive strike, but nothing more. But if one stranger comes rushing forward when it has Mind Poison Readied, and they do come within 10 feet, and in fact come within 5 feet and proceed to attack,the maelephant is caught flat-footed. Moreover, one stranger approaching is a far more likely scenario than any number of strangers greater than one approaching. The maelephant doesn’t have to react if zero strangers are approaching. If one is approaching, though, should the maelephant say, “Hmm, there aren’t more than one stranger approaching right now, so I’d better wait to see whether any others show up”? No. It should be prepared to deal with the one.
Next: planar incarnates, per reader request.
