## Cosmic Horror Tactics


The cosmic horror is a massive astral grotesquery—even more massive, in fact, than the higher-rated astral dreadnought. The two creatures have a couple of things in common besides their enormous size: They’re both aberrations (negatory: the astral dreadnought is a monstrosity) with astral origins, and they both have Legendary Resistance. However, while astral dreadnoughts are unaligned creatures, indifferent to other beings except when they’re hungry, and possess animal-level intelligence, cosmic horrors are hyperintelligent and malevolent. An astral dreadnought is a danger, but a cosmic horror is a threat.
With a flying speed of 100 feet, a cosmic horror is faster than most things in Wildspace. It also has a “walking” speed of 50 feet—probably more of a self-dragging speed, like an octopus hauling itself across a beach—but the only instance I can think of in which it might use that speed is pursuit of other creatures through tunnels in a mined-out asteroid. If a cosmic horror is somehow knocked prone while inside the gravity envelope of a spelljamming ship or asteroid, it will simply launch itself airborne again on its turn, and if it’s immobilized, it can’t use any movement speed, flying or walking.
A cosmic horror has extraordinary Strength, Constitution, Intelligence and Charisma, but of these four, Strength and Constitution are the highest, so it’s a melee-oriented brute—but one with a 30-foot reach, so it doesn’t need to get right in its opponents’ faces. A good place for it is 10 or 15 feet in the air above the opposing side, whence it can reach landbound targets roughly 25 feet in every direction. That’s 25 feet from the outer edge of the cosmic horror’s space, which is at least 20 feet across, since it’s a Gargantuan creature; or you can have it uncoil and stretch out horizontally, so that it occupies a rectangle 20 feet across and 100 feet long and reaches out 25 feet in every direction from that. The only safe place on your ship is belowdecks.

When Psychic Whispers isn’t on cooldown, it’s the cosmic horror’s choice of action as long as there are more than three targets visible to it. There’s some ambiguity regarding whether it can penetrate total cover or not: According to the Player’s Handbook, “A target with total cover can’t be targeted directly by an attack or a spell, although some spells can reach such a target by including it in an area of effect.” Strictly speaking, Psychic Whispers is neither an attack nor a spell, but the rules make oblique reference to other effects, such as dragons’ breath weapons, that also are neither attacks nor spells but are still blocked by total cover. I feel like psychic damage, being entirely nonphysical, is something that should penetrate many types of cover, but I have no basis for that beyond the fact that a number of divination spells penetrate cover (except for lead) as well.
The main reason I’m concerned about this question is that the cosmic horror lacks the Siege Monster trait, which would let it bash its way through a ship more easily, nor can it grapple objects with its tentacles. That being said, though, if the crew of a spelljamming ship simply dives belowdecks, slams the hatches shut and makes full sail to get away, a cosmic horror will simply chase it down, because it flies faster than even the fastest ship. And while it may not be able to demolish a ship with the efficiency of a kraken, it’s not as though it’s on a deadline. While the crew cowers inside, it can patiently batter the hull until it gives. Sooner or later, you have to fight this thing, whether you want to or not.
Cosmic horrors are immune to acid and poison damage, so opponents who deal only these types of damage don’t concern them. Similarly, they shrug at any attempt to charm, frighten or poison them. However, they don’t possess any immunity to normal weapon damage, and if a single opponent deals a cosmic horror enough damage for it to notice—we’re talking at least 28 damage in one round—it retaliates against that opponent with a Tentacle attack. (Tentacles deal force damage now, not bludgeoning, because Monsters of the Multiverse.) Otherwise, a cosmic horror takes preemptive action against sorcerers, warlocks and wizards, because it recognizes and shares their strengths—Intelligence and Charisma—and because they often cast spells that target cosmic horrors’ Achilles’ heel, i.e., their merely humanoid-average Dexterity and lack of proficiency in Dexterity saving throws. (They aren’t proficient in Con saves either, but their base modifier is +7, which is pretty good to begin with.) The cosmic horror’s Intelligence score is so high, it can not only read the stats off a player character’s sheet but predict their moves as well as you, their Dungeon Master, can.
In between turns, the cosmic horror has three legendary actions to choose from: Crushing Tentacle, Poison Jet and Teleport. The latter two both cost double, so the opportunity cost is that of two Crushing Tentacle attacks. On average, assuming successful saves half the time and failed saves half the time, these will deal a total of 27 damage. Making a similar assumption with respect to Poison Jet (whose DC is 21 rather than 22—not a typo, since Poison Jet is based on the cosmic horror’s Con modifier, while Crushing Tentacle is based on Strength, but also not a big enough difference to matter in this case), we can calculate that it has to have at least three opponents properly lined up for this legendary action to be worth its cost. As for Teleport, something has to have gone very wrong with the cosmic horror’s positioning for this legendary action to be worth its cost mid-combat. However, at the start of combat, when the cosmic horror doesn’t have anyone in its tentacles to crush yet, teleporting from what looks like a somewhat safe distance away to Oh gods it’s right on top of us! can be a terrifying introduction to its power.
I haven’t talked about its Wisdom yet, which isn’t exceptional but is decidedly enough for it to choose its battles carefully, to fight only when it’s confident of victory and to know when it ought to flee. Because of this thing’s aggressiveness, the answer to that last question is when it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 112 hp or fewer), and it Teleports if it must, in addition to Dashing, to put distance between itself and its foes.
But let’s talk about parley, because the cosmic horror has not only decent Wisdom but also extraordinary Charisma and telepathy, which it can use to communicate with any creature capable of speech. Instead of attacking immediately, a cosmic horror approaching a spelljamming ship may begin by talking to the captain, or to the whole crew, or just one other PC, chosen for who knows what reason. Here’s the thing: This creature is an aberration, and what it considers an appropriate way to open a conversation may not even constitute a meaningful sentence to whomever it’s “talking” to. Like, all of a sudden this thing appears off the port side, and the first thing it has to say to you is, “Extra sick fish need special training for extra fun. We will have a happy party now.” Without any kind of intonation to indicate whether this pronouncement is a greeting or a threat, the message’s recipient is left to stumble their way through a terrifying, incoherent conversation with an alien mind. Eventually, the cosmic horror exclaims in frustration, “Nnnnngggaaaah! I am squeezing the juice! More and more juice! You are sick for the last time! It is dancing!” and combat ensues.
That’s just one way you can play it if you want to convey that this thing is intelligent, not just a mindless juggernaut, while also eliciting the sinking feeling that the encounter is going to end badly. After all, its desires are incomprehensible. There’s no “getting to yes” with a creature whose interests you can’t even understand, let alone help it achieve. There’s only the tragedy of broken communication, and survivors left wondering whether there was any way at all that the conversation could have gone right.
Next: I don’t even want to write this phrase, but … space clowns.
