## Ulmist Inquisitor Tactics


The flavor text accompanying Ulmist inquisitors makes reference to a Strahd von Zarovich that most people never knew or have forgotten: the early years when, as he wrote in his journal, he “was good and just [and] thundered across the land like the wrath of a just god,” battling extraplanar evils. As Strahd strayed, his former comrade Ulmed founded an inquisition to detect the rot at the root of people’s souls before it had the chance to work its corruption upon them—employing methods about as gentle as those we usually associate with inquisitions.
There are three types of Ulmist inquisitor, one from each of the inquisition’s three orders, all of which have the same challenge rating. At CR 8, they’re only a solo threat against a low-level party; at intermediate levels, you’ll want to have some low-CR mooks accompany them. Reskinned cultists (CR 1/8), acolytes (CR 1/4) and thugs (CR 1/2) are appropriate if you want an inquisitor to command a small mob. Cult fanatics and priests (both CR 2) are better as lieutenants, appearing in pairs. A single knight or veteran (CR 3) might serve as muscle for an inquisitor of the Mind Fire or an inquisitor of the Tome; an inquisitor of the Sword wouldn’t need it. Only high-level adventurers are likely to encounter two or three Ulmist inquisitors together.

All Ulmist inquisitors, even inquisitors of the Sword, are psions first. For offense, inquisitors of the Mind Fire lean most heavily on their phenomenal Charisma, inquisitors of the Tome on extraordinary Intelligence, and inquisitors of the Sword on exceptional Wisdom, but mechanically, it’s all one and the same: Magic is their main weapon.
Defensively, things get interesting.
The primary defensive ability of inquisitors of the Mind Fire is Dexterity. Ideally, they want to do their work 40 to 60 feet away from anyone who might hurt them. Absent a defensive line of minions, it’s best that they use their psionics to neutralize opponents before those opponents can charge them. They can lay down a wallop with their Silver Longswords, but the opportunity cost is high. They have a job to do, and they can’t do it while swinging a blade.
Inquisitors of the Sword are balanced between Dexterity and Constitution. They can hang back and avoid damage if they like; they can also stride forth and absorb it. Although they, too, prefer to use their psionic power to get the job done, they’re capable skirmishers who can hold out quite a while in a protracted battle.
Inquisitors of the Tome are also balanced between Dexterity and Constitution; the trouble is, neither of those ability scores is very high. Compared with inquisitors of the other two orders, they’re easier to hit and easier to hurt. They don’t want to be trading blows at all if they can help it. They need that defensive line.
Before I dive back into the differences, here’s what else Ulmist inquisitors have in common: saving throw proficiencies in all mental abilities, immunity to being charmed or frightened, and 30 feet of truesight. Forget about trying to manipulate them with enchantment or illusion magic. It’s not going to work.
Inquisitors of the Mind Fire have the recharge ability Inquisitor’s Command, which they can use to make opponents who fail their saves either run away or turn on one another. How they make use of this ability depends a great deal on what their mission is and who their targets are, but consider: A ranged attacker is a threat at any distance, so it stands to reason that a charmed foe with a melee weapon should be sent to harass them. Alternatively, an inquisitor may be interested in avoiding collateral damage; those whom the inquisitor has deemed innocent may be telepathically commanded to remove themselves to a safe distance, posthaste.
Inquisitor’s Command recharges on a roll of 5 or 6. It’s strong, and if a serious fight is under way, an inquisitor of the Mind Fire makes use of it whenever it’s available. But what if it hasn’t come to that yet? Once per day, the inquisitor can psionically cast mass suggestion to influence up to a dozen creatures within 60 feet. How can the inquisitor use this spell to advance its goal most effectively? What suggestion helps it the most? How about something like: “I am here to correct the wayward; the innocent have nothing to fear as long as they do not interfere, and much to gain if they cooperate.” Or: “Relieve your souls of the guilty secrets that burden you. Confess your sins and crimes and submit to justice.” Suggestions like these help the inquisitor sort out the bystanders from the real miscreants.
Even this powerful ability may be better preceded by calm emotions, which inquisitors of the Mind Fire can cast at will. Players dump Charisma more often than they dump Wisdom, so an inquisitor can cast this spell to potentially head off a fight before it begins, then cast mass suggestion to speedily elicit confessions or sideline would-be defenders (unlike suggestion, mass suggestion doesn’t require concentration, so the inquisitor can keep calm emotions going all the while) and only afterward resort to Inquisitor’s Command to punish the aggressively uncooperative.
As for the rest of the inquisitor of the Mind Fire’s psionic repertoire:

Arcane eye is for spying. It’s used before combat, not during.
Detect magic and detect thoughts are also better outside combat, when the inquisitor can use them thoughtfully—and when they’re not taking time away from other pressing responsibilities, like smacking and trying not to be smacked.
Dispel magic can be useful in combat, but only to poof a spell that’s causing the inquisitor such inconvenience that it can’t consider doing any of the things it would rather be doing. It’s not going to waste time getting rid of, say, faerie fire. Depriving a rogue of invisibility, on the other hand, may be worth the investment of time.
Modify memory, which can be used only once per day and requires concentration and time, is best applied as dénouement, once the inquisitor has eliminated all opposition to its goal of isolating one or more corrupted (or corruptible) individuals so that it can purge the corruption. The preferred method of inquisitors of the Mind Fire is to probe deeply with detect thoughts to locate whatever event planted the seed of a subject’s supposed corruption, then cast modify memory to rewrite the recollection of the event and, hopefully, put the subject on a different path.

First, though, they have to eliminate the opposition, and if they can’t neutralize it via either persuasion or enchantment, they have to do so by force. That’s where the Mind Fire ranged attack comes in. Mind Fire can be employed from a safe distance and has the benefit of momentarily stunning a target who takes damage from it, allowing an inquisitor’s minions (if they have any) to move in and deliver a drubbing—which may be either fatal or nonfatal, as the situation demands. The Silver Longsword melee attack is reserved for foes who blitz the inquisitor.
There’s one spell I didn’t mention above: sending. Since Ulmist inquisitors can all communicate telepathically within a 120-foot radius, there’s no need to use this spell for interrogation or battlefield communication purposes. Instead, inquisitors of the Mind Fire cast it when they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 30 hp or fewer) to notify their superiors or colleagues of their most important findings so that the information isn’t lost if they should happen to be slain. An Ulmist inquisitor may be a duty-bound zealot who fights to the death or a pragmatist who withdraws from a losing fight in order to continue serving the cause, but whichever they are, they don’t like seeing all their hard work come to nothing—and the inquisition doesn’t like it, either.
Inquisitors of the Sword are the ones sent to deal with (read: clobber) targets believed to be incorrigible. They’re single-minded in their pursuit, ignoring bystanders and subduing meddlers. They have no recharge ability to compete with their Multiattack, which comprises two Silver Longsword attacks and allows short-range teleportation after each, so they rely on this action almost exclusively. They have four of the same at-will psionic powers as inquisitors of the Mind Fire (detect magic, detect thoughts, dispel magic and sending) and use them the same way, for the same purposes—which is to say, they rarely use them in combat at all. (With respect to sending, an inquisitor of the Sword is seriously wounded when reduced to 36 hp or fewer.)
In addition to teleporting as part of their Multiattack, inquisitors of the Sword have the Blink Step bonus action, which allows medium-range teleportation. The time to use this bonus action is almost always at the start of an inquisitor of the Sword’s turn—unless their target is a tough melee combatant whom the inquisitor needs to keep its distance from between turns, in which case the ability to bamf 30 feet away, then immediately bamf another 60 feet away, comes in handy.
Because of their Metabolic Control trait, inquisitors of the Sword are most at home in battles of attrition and have no compunction against dragging out fights as long as they can, especially if any of their opponents is capable of dealing more than 10 damage to them in a round. Blink Step lets them avoid dangerous concentrations of foes wielding melee weapons, giving them time to heal up from the damage they take, then teleport back into the fray when they feel ready, which is usually when they’re no longer moderately or seriously wounded (restored to 64 hp or more).
Now we come down to the inquisitor of the Sword’s three once-per-day psionic powers: dimension door, fly and greater invisibility. Each of these is too valuable to blow at the wrong moment; all three of them are useful as escape hatches in different ways. Dimension door can get inquisitors of the Sword out of any scrape; it also allows them to nonchalantly stroll through whatever obstacles their targets have barricaded themselves behind. Fly allows swift retreat (provided there’s an unobstructed route) as well as three-dimensional maneuvers. Greater invisibility allows them to appear and disappear with equal suddenness. Inquisitors of the Sword are prudent planners, gathering whatever intelligence they can on their targets and their targets’ defenses before commencing their assaults. They go into each fight with a good notion of which of these three powers they’ll employ, and how, and under what circumstances. Whichever ones they don’t need for their first strike, they bank in case of emergency.
Inquisitors of the Tome, as I mentioned above, keep their distance from battle as much as possible. Their goal is generally to retrieve a single target for questioning, for which they use either Otiluke’s resilient sphere or telekinesis. The heuristic is simple: for a target with more Strength than Dexterity, resilient sphere; for a target with more Dexterity than Strength, telekinesis.
Casting either of these spells prematurely, however, is a grievous mistake. Both of them require concentration, and inquisitors of the Tome don’t have impressive Constitution saving throw modifiers. Plus, if an inquisitor of the Tome is about to get rushed by melee attackers—especially by more than one at once—they need a way to get out of reach. That way is levitate, which requires concentration as well. Casting resilient sphere or telekinesis, only to have to drop it in order to cast levitate … that’s just sad.
Incidentally, while levitate is often tantamount to donning a “SHOOT ME” sign, inquisitors of the Tome have the benefit of both mage armor (always cast prophylactically before combat begins) and the Telekinetic Reflection reaction, which is like a slightly weaker shield that can send arrows and bolts back at the marksmen who shot them, so for them, hovering out in the open isn’t so awful. (Three-quarters cover is still better, though—if it’s available.)
Inquisitors of the Tome have three of the same at-will psionic powers as their fellow inquisitors from the other two orders (detect magic, dispel magic and sending) and use them the same way, for the same purposes. (Not detect thoughts, which they leave to the Order of the Mind Fire. With respect to sending, an inquisitor of the Tome is seriously wounded when reduced to 30 hp or fewer.) They can cast mage hand at will as well, but during a fight, there usually isn’t time for that.
Their special party trick is Implode, a 4–6 recharge ability, which means they can make use of it with abandon—although to use it against fewer than four targets at once is a waste. It deals substantial damage against targets who fail their saving throws, but what’s most entertaining about it is that it yanks all of them together into a pile at the center of the area of effect. Experienced players know what’s coming next: fireball! Inquisitors of the Tome can’t cast fireball, of course, but you don’t need to tell your players that. Just enjoy the panic as their characters scramble to get back on their feet and put distance between one another. (Clear-thinking players may realize that if the enemy inquisitor were able to cast fireball,they could have simply cast it in the first place, since the AoE of Implode is the same shape and size. This fact in no way lessens the action’s entertainment value.)
While Implode is on cooldown, an inquisitor of the Tome can bat away threats with Force Bolt, which it gets to use twice per Multiattack. Spreading the damage around is one choice, but if an opponent is determined to close to melee distance, attacking them twice with Force Bolt has the potential to push them back 10 feet with each hit. Three steps forward, two steps back. For inquisitors of the Tome, Silver Longsword is for use only when attacked by a melee opponent after losing concentration on levitate and falling to earth.
Because they rely so heavily on ranged attacks and area-effect damage, inquisitors of the Tome generally don’t have the option of holding back and subduing opponents without killing them. Some don’t care, but some do. Those who do care rely on their minions to handle the administration of knockout blows.
Next: star spawn emissaries.
