---
title: Making Merrow Fun, Deadly, and Worth Running | Foe Foundry
short_title: Making Merrow Fun, Deadly, and Worth Running
description: Upgrade your Merrow encounters with 5E statblocks, abyssal powers, and adventure hooks. Inspired by Encounter Every Enemy’s deep-dive into Merrow lore.
tags:
  - tips
  - powers
image: img/icons/favicon.webp
json_ld: true
date: 2025-06-08
---

# Making Merrow Fun, Deadly, and Worth Running

[**Looking to get started with Merrow? Start Here**](../monsters/merrow.md)

Recently, our friends at [**Encounter Every Enemy**](https://encountereveryenemy.wordpress.com/) took a deep dive into the lore and overlooked horror of the humble [[Merrow]].

[**Encounter Every Enemy**](https://encountereveryenemy.wordpress.com/) sets the stage for a proper Merrow encounter:

> The battle happens at night, during a storm. Lightning flashes, the deck of the ship is slick with rain, the wind is flinging sails and booms around to catch the unwary and toss them overboard into the webbed hands of even more Merrow attackers. 

-- <cite>[Encounter Every Enemy](https://encountereveryenemy.wordpress.com/)</cite>

Their post reminded us just how much rich abyssal horror is hiding in this classic aquatic D&D monster, and that they're far more terrifying (and interesting) than they often get credit for. If you want a fresh take on monster lore, encounters, and tactics, check out their series!

Unfortunately, the 2014 and 2024 *Monster Manual* versions of the [[Merrow]] are pretty bland. There are references to watery ambushes and snatching foes beneath the water in the lore, but it's not highlighted with mechanics that really bring these aspects to life. Also, there's only a single CR2 statblock, which means your options and variety are limited.

So, we decided to take the *plunge* and make Merrow exciting:

- 4 unique Statblocks ([[Merrow]], [[Merrow Blood-Blessed]], [[Merrow Storm-Blessed]], [[Merrow Abyssal Lord]]) with dozens of variants each
- Lore for [**Thalassant, the Lord of Sacrifice**](../monsters/merrow.md#thallassant-the-lord-of-sacrifice), a legendary lord
- Unique [Merrow Powers](../powers/merrow.md) to give these monsters some fun mechanical differentiation
- Flavorful and table-ready [Merrow Encounter Ideas](../monsters/merrow.md#merrow-encounter-ideas) and [Merrow Adventure Ideas](../monsters/merrow.md#merrow-adventure-ideas) that play to the themes highlighted in [**Encounter Every Enemy**](https://encountereveryenemy.wordpress.com/)

## 4 Unique Merrow Statblocks

As usual for [Foe Foundry](../index.md){.branding}, we created multiple monster statblocks, each with dozens of unique combinations of powers. You can click on the dice to re-roll the stats and try a new loadout, or check out the [Generator](../generate.md) to customize the monster yourself.

You can use these statblocks to create a whole "From the Deep" campaign arc, especially if you take advantage of the ready-to-go [Merrow Encounters](../monsters/merrow.md#merrow-encounter-ideas) and [Merrow Adventures](../monsters/merrow.md#merrow-adventure-ideas).

### Merrow

[[Merrow]] are aquatic brutes that hunt coastal settlements and shipping lanes, looking for prey to capture. A great low-level threat for underwater encounters or abyssal cult campaigns.

[[!Merrow]]

### Merrow Blood-Blessed

The [[Merrow Blood-Blessed]] is a mid-tier merrow empowered through dark rituals to become tougher, deadlier, and more relentless.

[[!Merrow Blood-Blessed]]

### Merrow Storm-Blessed

The [[Merrow Storm-Blessed]] harnesses the elemental wrath of the sea for the merrow's dark purposes. These priests and priestesses are a great boss monster for a level 5 aquatic adventure or sidekick for a higher-level aquatic threat like an **Aboleth** or [[Merrow Abyssal Lord]].

[[!Merrow Storm-Blessed]]

### Merrow Abyssal Lord

The [[Merrow Abyssal Lord]] is the perfect underwater boss monster for 5E, suitable for epic aquatic battles and abyssal sacrifices. This legendary merrow statblock can represent [*Thalassant, the Lord of Sacrifice*](../monsters/merrow.md#thallassant-the-lord-of-sacrifice) - the original Merrow and prophet of the Abyss.

[[!Merrow Abyssal Lord]]

---

## 5 Unique Merrow Powers

These top merrow powers will keep your players on their toes, desparately trying not to be dragged into the roiling seas.

[[!Kelp Nets]]

These ironweave [[Kelp Nets]] are the perfect way to grab, snag, and abduct sacrifices. Deploy the nets and drag those landlubbers off the boat into the dark depths below, never to be seen again...

[[!Anemone Poison]]

This toxic [[Anemone Poison]] venom is especially deadly when in contact with sea water. Many [[Merrow]] brave the dangerous extraction process just to possess a single venom-tipped harpoon.

[[!Reel In The Prey]]

You can play up the idea of "reverse fishing" with [[Reel in the Prey]] ability. After hitting an enemy with the Sharktooth Harpoon, use this bonus action to pull the prey into the ocean. It also offers the player a choice - if they don't want to be dragged below they need to accept additional damage and a bleeding condition.

[[!Lashing Winds]]

The [[Lashing Winds]] power is an example of one of our unique [Token Powers](../topics/tokens.md) that creates a battlefield-control [emanation](../topics/emanations.md). Perfect to summon right on top of the PC's boat, so the only safe place to go is into the water.

---

## Plug-and-Play Merrow Encounters and Adventures

Looking to create an aquatic adventure for your D&D campaign? We've created table-ready [Merrow Encounters](../monsters/merrow.md#merrow-encounter-ideas) and [Merrow Adventures](../monsters/merrow.md#merrow-adventure-ideas) that you can drop into any session or campaign.

My personal favorites include:

> A merchant is nearing bankruptcy after his trading fleets keep getting attacked by [[Merrow Blood-Blessed]]. Suspiciously, none of his rivals ships are affected. The merchant has hired the PCs to investigate this improbably bad luck.

> A bloated corpse floats face-down near the shore. If touched or turned, it detonates (use a *Cloudkill* spell) and alerts the nearby [[Merrow]] ambush

---

## The Sea Hungers

Merrow have always had the seeds of a great monster: tragic origins, demonic corruption, and a place in the deep unknown where anything could be waiting. But too often, they’ve been left adrift with bland statblocks and forgettable roles in combat.

With the help of [**Encounter Every Enemy**](https://encountereveryenemy.wordpress.com/) for inspiration, we’ve reimagined the [[Merrow]] as something far more dangerous: cultists of the Abyss, elemental storm-callers, and sacrificial prophets dragging helpless victims to darkness and despair.

Whether you’re running a one-shot on the high seas or a full arc centered on abyssal horror, these new [[Merrow]] are ready to rise.

### Summon Your Own

Explore all four Merrow statblocks, encounter ideas, and short adventure prompts below—or summon a random Merrow and see what washes ashore.

[Ready your tridents. The tide is coming in. Summon a Merrow](../monsters/merrow.md)

---

[[@Subscribe to the Foe Foundry Newsletter]]

---