---
title: "Dev Diary #1 | Foe Foundry"
short_title: "Dev Diary #1 | Foe Foundry"
description: "Discover what's new at Foe Foundry: monster re-rolling, new statblocks like Orcs and Goblins, and a sneak peek at the monster editor coming soon."
tags:
  - announcements
  - dev_diary
image: img/icons/favicon.webp
json_ld: true
date: 2025-05-15
---

# Dev Diary #1

Welcome to the first official Dev Diary for [Foe Foundry](../index.md){.branding}! We launched just two weeks ago (see the [announcement](../blog/2025_04_29_announcement.md)), and a lot has already happened. I’ll be sharing these updates roughly every two weeks.

## Recent Features

### Re-Roll Monsters

You can now re-roll statblocks! This is your first peek into how the Monster Generator works by combining handcrafted powers into fresh, unique monsters. A full editor is in progress, but for now, you can re-roll and get a new twist instantly.

Try it out here!

[[!Orc Hardened One]]

### Newsletter

I’ve launched a free weekly newsletter packed with GM tips, monster ideas, and site updates.

[[@Join the Foe Foundry Newsletter]]

### RSS Feed

Prefer RSS? You can now follow all blog updates via [RSS feed](../rss.xml).

## New Monsters

Several flavorful statblocks and monster families have been added since launch:

- [Orcs](../monsters/orc.md) - Bloodrage-Fueled Ancestral Warriors
- [Goblins](../monsters/goblin.md) - Chaotic tricksters, pillagers, and endless nuisances
- [Rivals](../families/rivals.md) - create rival adventuring parties to spice up your game
- [Villains](../families/villains.md) - summon memorable villains for your campaign

Check out this [[Orc Bloodrite Shaman]] as an example:

[[!Orc Bloodrite Shaman]]

## Other Articles

- [Using Token powers to create dynamic combat](../blog/2025_05_05_dynamic_tokens_dd5e.md)
- [Unique and interesting Celestial Powers](../blog/2025_05_10_celestial_powers.md)

---

## What's Next?

I'm hard at work on the **Generator** that will allow you to edit monsters by adding powers, removing powers, and smashing two monsters together. Want to create a weird aberrant mind-flayer infested Ogre? When the generator is done, you'll be able to with a couple of clicks

This feature will mark the transition from Alpha to Beta, and I can’t wait to share more.

---

I can’t wait to see what you build with Foe Foundry — and I’d love your feedback as the project grows.

Thanks for reading, and thanks for playing.

🧟 [Explore the Monster Library](../monsters/index.md)

**– Cordialgerm**