## Cerberus Tactics


Modern roleplaying games often include minotaurs as a species, but in Greek myth, there was only one: the Minotaur. Our krakens descend from the Kraken of Nordic lore; our medusas, from Medusa. “Leviathan” and “behemoth” likewise both began as Hebrew proper nouns. Yet for some reason, Mythic Odysseys of Theros’s inclusion of “cerberi” as a genus of monstrosities hits me as being particularly goofy. It’s as if Van Richten’s Guide to Ravenloft had included a listing for “draculas.”
It’s commonly believed that the Cerberus of myth had three heads, but in fact, he was most often depicted in art as having only two, and in a few cases with only one. Theros presents a lesser, two-headed species of cerberus and a more formidable, three-headed species. In other respects, however, the two-headed cerberus and the Underworld cerberus are essentially the same:


They’re fast-moving ambush predators, with proficiency in Stealth and double proficiency in Perception.
They’re immune to fire and necrotic damage and can’t be surprised, charmed, frightened, blinded, deafened, exhausted or stunned.
They’re brute attackers whose Aggressive trait lets them initiate combat by charging their victims.
They have advantage on saving throws against being knocked unconscious, because you can only clonk them on one head at a time, and they’ve got extra.
They have Pack Tactics, which interestingly implies that they’re often encountered not as lone guardians, like the Cerberus of myth, but as companions to other guardians—or, more alarmingly, in packs.
Their Multiattack grants them one Bite attack per head.
They exhale lava. As far as I can tell, this ability is an invention totally original to Mythic Odysseys of Theros. Classical myth doesn’t comment on Cerberus’s breath at all except, in the Odes of the Roman lyric poet Horace, to describe it as “fetid.” Nor does this breath weapon originate with the Theros set of Magic: The Gathering cards. I’m wondering whether it might be an Easter egg: a reference to the discovery on Mars of a geological feature called Cerberus Fossae, a series of parallel rifts created several million years ago by tectonic activity, from which lava once flowed.

Like most fifth edition breath weapons, a cerberus’s lava-spewing action (called, oddly generically, “Breath Weapon”) is a 5–6 recharge ability, dealing fire damage to each target in a conical area and potentially encasing those targets in rock. The expected damage from this ability is on par with a cerberus’s Multiattack if every bite hits, and the rider gives it additional tactical power, so it’s absolutely a preferred action. It also gives the cerberus the ability to initiate combat from a considerable distance away.
The area of effect of the two-headed cerberus’s breath weapon is a 15-foot cone; the Underworld cerberus’s is a 30-foot cone. Under 2014 rules (Dungeon Master’s Guide, chapter 8, Targets in Areas of Effect table), these areas of effect imply that the cerberus positions itself so that they target at least two or three opponents, respectively. Under 2024 rules (DMG, chapter 3, Targets in Areas of Effect table), the two-headed cerberus needs to target at least two opponents to make the breath weapon worthwhile, but the Underworld cerberus should prefer to target at least five. Fortunately, its 60-foot movement speed gives it a lot of mobility; in most cases, it should be able to get wherever it needs to be to get the most out of its breath weapon.
The two types of cerberus follow the same attack pattern: They begin combat hidden, waiting for foes to approach. When a sufficient number come within a threshold distance—at least two within 95 feet for the two-headed cerberus, at least three or five within 150 feet for the Underworld cerberus—they charge forth, using their full movement plus the movement from their Aggressive bonus action, and unleash their breath weapon. (This sequence is significantly more effective for a cerberus than waiting hidden to make a single unseen attack with advantage.)
In subsequent rounds, a cerberus always uses its breath weapon again if it happens to recharge and can be aimed at enough targets without having to provoke an opportunity attack by repositioning, but otherwise it Multiattacks, generally preferring to target foes restrained by hardening lava. A cerberus could probably get away with risking an opportunity attack from a restrained opponent if it meant getting to use its breath weapon from a more favorable position, but even Underworld cerberi don’t quite have the Intelligence to realize that, and two-headed cerberi absolutely don’t.
However, even two-headed cerberi choose their targets wisely. Being immune to fire and necrotic damage along with a number of debilitating conditions, they’re not unduly concerned about spellcasters; a greater concern is that neither type of cerberus has an especially high Armor Class. Therefore, they want to make the quickest work they can of opponents fighting them with conventional weapons.
But there’s a conundrum there. Should a cerberus prefer to attack a restrained target, since it has a better chance to hit with each attack? Or should it prefer to attack an unrestrained target, hoping to take them down before they can deal it too much damage, and knowing that a restrained opponent won’t be as able to hurt it in the meantime?
Let’s look an extremely idealized case: Two level 2 PCs are in melee with a two-headed cerberus. One is restrained; one is free. Each has AC 15 and 21 hp, makes one attack per round, has +5 to hit and deals an average of 8 damage. In two rounds, the unrestrained PC deals an expected 11 damage to the cerberus, while the restrained PC deals only 7. In the same two rounds, the cerberus can deal an expected 16 damage to the unrestrained PC—or an expected 24 damage to the restrained PC, enough to render them unconscious. Taking an opponent off the board is always better than not doing so, because of the impact it has on the opposition’s action economy. If the cerberus happens to go first in the initiative order and attacks the restrained foe, it avoids taking damage from them in that second round, but if it attacks the unrestrained foe, it still takes damage from both. (I won’t bore you with the numbers for an Underworld cerberus against level 6 PCs, but the result is basically the same: A restrained enemy gets taken out in two rounds, while an unrestrained enemy still stands.)
Thus, in most cases, given a choice, a cerberus prefers to attack a restrained target. However, the best case is when an ally of the cerberus is within 5 feet of an unrestrained opponent, allowing the cerberus to attack them with advantage from Pack Tactics. Now the cerberus has a chance to bring down its unrestrained foe and take less total damage from the restrained one. Mind you, none of these choices are the result of calculation on the cerberus’s part. It’s all instinct and experience.
Two-headed cerberi are basically brutal beasts; they withdraw from combat when seriously wounded (reduced to 15 hp or fewer). But Underworld cerberi trained as sentries perform their duty faithfully and fight to death. Only wild, free-ranging Underworld cerberi, hunting for food and sport, back off when seriously wounded (reduced to 41 hp or fewer).
Next: fleecemane lions.
