## Carrionette Tactics


Carrionettes go “zip!” when they move, “bop!” when they stop, “whirrrrrrr” when they stand still, and they want to steal your body and trap your soul in theirs! Ha ha! How cute!
They’re not tactically complicated, but aside from their Soul Swap action, they’re also not that threatening, and there’s really only one way to use them effectively. Here are the key points:

With high Dexterity as both its primary offensive ability and its primary defensive ability, the carrionette is a shock attacker—but one that moves relatively slowly and deals negligible damage on a hit. The real danger to the target is that if they fail a Charisma saving throw, the hit slows them down, effectively banes their attack rolls and ability checks, and sets them up for Soul Swap.
The carrionette also isn’t that fast: 25 feet of movement speed, less than the humanoid average of 30 feet. If it doesn’t slow its target with a Silver Needle hit (which, remember, also requires a failed Charisma save), it’s easily outrun.
However, its False Object feature gives it a way to attack with surprise, giving it one more round to accomplish its goal. That extra round of time is essential.
Soul Swap is the goal: the transfer of the carrionette’s soul to the target’s body, and vice versa. For this to happen, the target has to fail another Charisma save. If it does, however, it’s out of commission for an hour, while the carrionette can happily stroll off on its victim’s own legs. The most entertaining part of this swap, I think, is that the carrionette retains its high Wisdom and Charisma but also its low Intelligence, and allowing the victim’s player to roleplay this shrewd and charming but also kind of derpy creature (the flavor text says “childlike,” but I don’t see that these are miles apart) offers some measure of compensation for the fact that their player character’s consciousness is helplessly trapped inside a toy.


Getting back to tactical points, though, the success of this whole plan hinges on one successful attack roll plus two failed Charisma saves—one for Silver Needle, one for Soul Swap—with a DC that’s easy to beat. If you figure that the average adventurer has a +1 Charisma saving throw modifier, that’s a 50/50 chance of success on each save, and therefore only a 1 in 4 chance that they’ll fail both. Those are terrible odds.
With Intelligence 8, a carrionette is just barely able to tell when things are going wrong and switch to a plan B, but it’s not capable of accurately assessing its potential targets’ specific weaknesses. However, with Wisdom 14, it’s good at choosing the right moment to strike—and at holding back if it’s unsure that it can succeed.
Going back to the first requirement, hitting with Silver Needle, even a slightly dim animated toy can figure out that it’s easier to stab someone wearing no armor than it is to stab someone wearing lots of armor. Of course, this snap judgment may result in its making a run at the barbarian or the monk rather than the wizard or the sorcerer, but them’s the breaks. At least it has even chances to hit against a target with an Armor Class as high as 15.
However, for a shock attacker whose initial shock attack fails—and in this case, failure means either a miss with Silver Needle or a successful saving throw against it—there’s really only one smart follow-up move, and that’s to get the heck out of there. No one is going to passively wait and see what a toy that just tried to stab them is going to do next. They’re going to try to smash it. Time to Dash for the nearest mousehole, then find a whole bunch of other toys to blend in with. (Gotta suck up the opportunity attacks—the carrionette is too slow for Disengaging to work—unless the mousehole is less than 25 feet away.)
To be frank, a monster whose only strategy is so likely to fail seems somewhat maladapted. Is there any way to compensate, short of rigging die rolls or arbitrarily increasing the saving throw DC? Well, there are a couple of things we can do. First, the carrionette can refrain from attacking unless its prospective victim is the only one in the room. Second, the carrionette doesn’t have to attack right away. It can sit motionless and observe, looking for clues as to which of its opponents might offer the best combination of stabbability and susceptibility to a bane. The simple formula for that is AC plus Charisma modifier, lowest sum wins. (That’s Charisma modifier, not Charisma saving throw modifier, which the carrionette has no way of knowing about.) However, because the carrionette isn’t especially clever, this assessment takes a while: at least one round per enemy, and possibly a full minute or more, unless it’s immediately obvious that somebody’s AC + Cha mod is less than 10. If one aspect of Intelligence is quickness of apprehension, well, unfortunately, the carrionette has the opposite of that.
Finally, note that the carrionette’s challenge rating is a mere 1. As built, this little construct is a suitable solo enemy for level 1 PCs only. If you’re going to throw one at higher-level PCs, you need to do one of two things: either increase its hit points, proficiency bonus and damage significantly (see “Creating a Monster,” chapter 9 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide, but forget about trying to make sense of its offensive CR—just start on the CR 1/4 line and move all its stats the same number of lines down the chart, maintaining the tradeoff of one step of hit points for 2 points of AC), or make it an opportunistic attacker that waits until its foes are all wrapped up in fighting other things. The latter strategy forgoes the benefit of surprise from its false appearance—characters in combat will already be alert—so its enemies’ attention had better be completely occupied by their other opponents, to an extent that they can’t shift their focus to deal with a new threat.
One other particularly tricky bit: If the carrionette succeeds in swapping bodies with a victim but its original body is destroyed, both the carrionette and the victim it swapped bodies with die. Very bad! Not good! Thus, the newly humanoid carrionette can’t just say, “Ow! Hey! That toy stabbed me! Get it!” and sic its new allies on its victim. On the contrary, it now has the problem of having to protect its former body, with its victim’s soul inside.
My solution to this problem is simple: Change the carrionette’s size from Small to Tiny, so that the transplanted carrionette can shove its former body in a bag or place it back up on a shelf. Small doesn’t make much sense to begin with anyway. An 8-inch-tall toy is just a toy, but a 2- or 3-foot-tall toy calls attention to itself—not exactly optimal for a creature that depends so heavily on the element of surprise. (If you’re getting hung up on the hit dice, change them from 6d6 + 6 to 8d4 + 8.)
Next: bodytaker plants.
