## Gaj Tactics


Today, by request, I’m looking at the giant-bug-like gaj. The first thing I notice in their stat block is their climbing speed. What need have astral beings of climbing? They can fly with their minds. Therefore, despite being aberrations, gaj aren’t creatures you’ll find in the Astral Sea or Wildspace. These are creatures you’ll find inhabiting other planets. (Except that, since they’re ambush predators—cf. their double proficiency in Perception and Stealth—they’ll probably find you before you find them.)
Gaj’s primary offensive ability is their very high Strength, and their primary defensive ability is their high Constitution, so they’re primarily brutes that don’t have to worry about (a) taking down their prey in just one or two rounds, or (b) other creatures trying to shoo them away from their victims. But as befits an aberration, there’s a weird twist: their high Wisdom, which they also use offensively.

Their three offensive actions (not counting Multiattack) are Mandibles, Mind-Probing Antennae and Paralyze. Mandibles are just what they sound like: a Strength-based melee attack that automatically grapples on a hit, and can only be used against that one grappled creature unless and until it gets free. Paralyze is also just what it sounds like: an immobilizing whammy. Mind-Probing Antennae is peculiar: an attempt to extract intel from the target’s mind. For a gaj to use this ability, the target must be grappled.
A gaj’s Multiattack allows one Mandibles attack and one of its two mental abilities. Paralyzing a target makes it easier to hit with the Mandibles, and a hit with Mandibles is a necessary precondition for Mind-Probing Antennae. The Multiattack description specifies what it comprises but gives no indication that it has to happen in any particular order. So the optimal order is obvious: Paralyze/Mandibles, then Mandibles/Mind-Probing Antennae.
But a little more analysis is required, because the DCs on Paralyze and MPA? Pitifully low. What’s more, Paralyze recharges only on a 6, not on 5–6. If the gaj makes a bad guess about whom to Paralyze, it’s good night, Vienna. So how good is the gaj at sizing up its prospective targets?
Gaj have Wisdom 15, high enough for them to choose their battles carefully and pick fights only when they’re sure they’ll win. However, their Intelligence is only 12. That’s enough for them to have a good plan in place, but not quite enough for them to accurately assess their enemies’ weaknesses and target accordingly. Gaj are going to be prone to error.
That may not matter so much, though. According to the flavor text in Boo’s Astral Menagerie, “They ambush prey by burying themselves under sand or silt and lying in wait, lurking in dark caves, or perching on natural stone ledges, where they blend in with their surroundings.” OK, so they’re making their initial attacks unseen, hoping to gain a round of surprise and advantage on their first attack roll. Paralyze, the ability they lead with, is not an attack or a spell, so if a gaj tries to use it and fails (i.e., if the target succeeds on their saving throw), nothing happens; its presence and position aren’t given away. That means it can continue to lurk until Paralyze recharges. If it’s lucky, that happens before its intended prey has wandered more than 60 feet away. If not … better luck next time.
Gaj must have some target selection heuristic, though, mustn’t they? Their average Intelligence is higher than the humanoid mean. That may be so, but on what basis do you discern someone’s Wisdom? Strength, at least, can be inferred from musculature; Constitution, from build, posture, gait and whether or not they have a persistent cough; Intelligence, from eavesdropping on their speech. To pick out an individual with low Wisdom, though, you have to hope they’re in mid-ramble about their distrust of vaccines or something as they pass by. That’s not a lot to hang your hopes on.
But there’s another angle to come at it from. Maybe they’re not as concerned about the likelihood of being able to extract information from a victim’s brain as they are about the value of the information they might extract. Gaj are sapient. Presumably, they’re native to the world(s) they inhabit. Possibly, they’re aware of the presence of alien interlopers such as the player characters. Perhaps, what the PCs know is of particular interest to them. Maybe even one particular PC. Going back to their super-proficiency in Perception and Stealth, gaj might be aware of the PCs’ presence and spend some time tracking and observing them to try to discern what they’re up to before one of them opts for the direct method of taking a core sample of their thoughts. And if that’s the case—if they’ve been gathering and sharing intel with one another all along—then that one gaj will have a much better idea of which PC might know the most. They might not even be looking for information about what that PC has learned about the gaj. They might be looking for info on what the PC has learned about the gaj’s enemies—or, for that matter, about some other thing they want. We shouldn’t presume that they have no interests beyond stalking creatures and preying on them for the content of their craniums.
Anyway, since it seems pretty clear that the gaj’s goal is not to eat the creatures trapped in their jaws but to conduct a rude sort of interrogation, a gaj isn’t going to run away with a grappled target or even try to kill it, necessarily (although it may not care whether or not it does). And since it’s not motivated by hunger, it has no strong reason to hang around if it meets stiff resistance. Therefore, a gaj is deterred when it’s only moderately wounded (reduced to 52 hp or fewer). It drops the target in its jaws, Disengages and scuttles away, climbing up out of reach if it has the means to do so.
It’s worth noting that the gaj’s challenge rating is only 4. That’s not a lot for a solo enemy; it’s the kind of “boss” you throw at low-level adventurers, and how likely are they to be gallivanting around outer space? It’s more likely, therefore, that you’ll want to throw a whole gang of gaj at your PCs, each one of which stays hidden until it succeeds in Paralyzing a target. The exact number will range from half your party size at levels 6 through 8 to three per PC at level 17 and above.
Next: giff!
