## Theran Hydra Tactics


The ironscale hydra is fundamentally no different from an ordinary hydra. It has a higher Armor Class, it’s faster on land and in the water, and it’s stronger and tougher (but also less dexterous). It also has one trait that the basic hydra doesn’t have: Acidic Blood, which splashes every creature in its immediate vicinity with acid anytime it takes piercing or slashing damage. None of these differences, however, is great enough to change its tactics from those of the basic hydra. So let’s skip forward to Polukranos, the World-Eater, a legendary ironscale hydra with Intelligence on par with a monkey’s—just enough to solve problems and exhibit malice.
With Polukranos (“Many-Heads”—personally, I’d have spelled it “Polykranos,” since we’re used to seeing both Ancient Greek and modern Greek υ transliterated as y, and the stem poly- is in, well, basically everything), we have not only higher Intelligence but higher Wisdom, enough to make a major difference in its willingness to pick a fight, plus the Siege Monster trait and some legendary actions. It has a higher Charisma, too, but the only thing this ability really affects is its susceptibility to banishment, and since it’s a monstrosity, it comes right back after 1 minute anyway. Its added Stomp and Tail attacks come into play only as part of its legendary actions; on its turn, it does nothing but Bite with each of its heads.
A basic hydra positions itself wherever it can attack as many targets as possible, up to the number of heads it has, and attacks every one of them once, then uses any leftover heads to Bite the biggest, then the next-biggest and so on—unless someone has just cut off one of its heads, in which case both of the replacement heads attack them. Polukranos is a little smarter than that. It has excellent senses (expertise in Perception) and will often notice when its enemies are hiding behind cover or inside a structure, and it relentlessly strikes at the cover or structure until it’s destroyed before turning its attention to its thus-exposed targets. (It’s mechanistic in this tendency, and its foes can exploit it by running from cover to cover—if enough different sources of cover are available—in order to direct more of its damage output toward inanimate objects and less of it at themselves.) The reach of its Bite attack is 15 feet, and it doesn’t come closer to its targets than that unless it has to. If they want to run up and expose themselves to its Acidic Blood every time they land a hit, that’s up to them.

The big gun among Polukranos’s legendary actions is Trampling Charge, which costs its entire legendary action budget for the turn; if it uses Trampling Charge, it’s not using either of its other legendary actions, and vice versa. My initial thought was that, since Stomp deals slightly less damage than Tail, for Trampling Charge to be a better choice than simply using Tail Swipe three times there must be at least four foes in its 50-foot-long, straight-line path. (Since Polukranos occupies a space 20 feet wide, it’s easier to get foes lined up in front of it for Trampling Charge than for, say, a lightning bolt spell, whose area of effect is only 5 feet wide.)
But that’s assuming that it has at least one Tail Swipe target within reach (15 feet). The tricky thing about legendary actions that don’t include movement is that a monster has to use them where it is. If Polukranos is too particular about how many opponents Trampling Charge will affect, it may find itself without any targets in reach to make Tail attacks against. So let’s give it some grace and say that it’s enough to have three opponents in its path, because the alternative is waiting for those opponents to run up to it and make attacks of their own, and generally only a couple of front-line warriors will be bold enough to do something like that.
There’s another catch to Trampling Charge, however: None of the foes in its path can be behind cover. Trampling Charge explicitly deals damage only to creatures, and while Polukranos can move through the space of any Huge or smaller creature, it can’t move through objects or structures it can’t budge. Now, given its size and Strength, it can budge a lot: With a carrying capacity of 3,000 pounds, it can push, drag, or lift twice that weight. A chariot might not take damage from Polukranos’s Trampling Charge, since it’s not a creature, but it would definitely be sent flying. But a tree, rooted in the ground, would stop Polukranos in its tracks; ditto a stone wall.
Thus, the prerequisites for Trampling Charge are still rather steep: three or more targets, arrayed within 50 feet of Polukranos in one direction, in a band 20 feet wide, with no other obstacle to block Polukranos’s movement. If these prerequisites are met anytime after Polukranos’s turn ends and it hasn’t yet taken any other legendary action, this one is its automatic choice. Alas, it doesn’t have the Intelligence to recognize when its enemies are almost in position, nor does it have the patience to wait and see whether they’ll go ahead and line up for it. If the prerequisites aren’t met, it goes straight to one of its other legendary actions.
Like a dragon, Polukranos uses its Detect legendary action anytime an opponent attempts to move stealthily within its line of sight. Tail Swipe is simply a free attack, a default option to use when there’s an enemy within reach and neither other legendary action applies.
Even with Intelligence 4 instead of 2, Polukranos is still instinct-bound, unable to vary its combat behavior. But with Wisdom 14, it knows better than to tangle with anyone who poses a real danger to it. It lacks the ability to communicate, so it can’t talk its way out of a confrontation, but if the encounter with Polukranos is of Deadly difficulty (see Dungeon Master’s Guide chapter 3, “Creating a Combat Encounter”), it attacks without hesitation, whereas if it’s of Hard difficulty, Polukranos balks, waiting to see what its foes will do. If the encounter is Easy or Medium, Polukranos doesn’t even wait around; it runs away or dives underwater, and heroes who want to slay it will have to chase after it to get the chance. Only if its pursuers catch up to it and engage it in combat does it fight back, its monstrous nature getting the better of its judgment.
Regardless of encounter difficulty, Polukranos attempts to flee when seriously wounded (reduced to 84 hp or fewer), instinctively Disengaging if it’s within more than one enemy’s reach and Dashing otherwise.
Next: Typhon.
