## Typhon Tactics


The typhon has some of the best flavor text I’ve read in any fifth edition Dungeons & Dragons monster sourcebook—so good, it’s difficult for me to paraphrase, as I often do, because it nails the creature’s vibe perfectly. If you have Mythic Odysseys of Theros, go read it (it’s on page 246), then come back.
OK, down to business. The typhon is a Huge monstrosity with extraordinary Strength and Constitution—an unambiguous melee brute—whose other ability scores pale in comparison. It’s not mindless, but it’s not a bright bulb, either: Its Intelligence 7 is on par with a caveman’s, and while its Wisdom and Charisma are higher than humanoid average, their influence on its combat behavior is modest.
Its Multiattack comprises one use each of its three melee attacks: Flurry of Bites, Constrict and Maw. The key thing here is to use Constrict first, because it grapples and restrains the target on a hit, conferring advantage on its follow-up Flurry and Maw attack rolls. It also has the longest reach of the three: 15 feet vs. 10 feet.

Combined with the typhon’s 40-foot speed, what we have here is a creature that scrambles forth from its lair, or wherever else it happens to be lurking, snatches a victim with whatever limb it uses to Constrict with (a detail that’s omitted from both the stat block and the flavor text—I guess it’s part of the typhon’s “writhing flesh”) when it comes within 15 feet, then comes 5 feet closer and bites the heck out of them. To ensure that it’s able to make those last two attacks, it chooses a target that’s no more than 50 feet from its initial position.
So how does it choose a target? As it happens, target selection is one cognitive task it’s good at. Its Armor Class is a respectable 17, and it’s got plenty of hit points, so it’s not particularly afraid of front-line warriors. On the other hand, of the big three saving throws, the only one it has particularly robust saving throws in is Constitution. In fact, despite having a high Constitution modifier already, it’s also proficient in Con saves, giving it a whopping +10 Con save modifier. In contrast, its Dexterity and Wisdom save modifiers are +0 and +1. Sad! It’s enough to produce a dim but present awareness that spellcasters are very dangerous and that it should devour them first.
Being a Huge creature, it’s unimpeded by merely Medium-size humanoids in its path, and it will storm right over them, heedless of opportunity attacks, in order to get at a spellcaster—preferably, one in the back, because they tend to be the tenderest morsels. (Clerics often have hard shells.) That said, unless they’re dressed in a stereotypical fashion, a typhon may not immediately recognize a spellcaster as a spellcaster—but it recognizes spellcasting immediately, and promptly rectifies its oversight.
A moderately wounded typhon (reduced to 136 hit points or fewer) is willing to consider the possibility that it may be outmatched. At this point, the difficulty of the encounter (see Dungeon Master’s Guide chapter 3, “Creating a Combat Encounter”) becomes relevant. If the encounter is Deadly, it keeps fighting. If the encounter is Hard, it keeps fighting until it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 78 hit points or fewer). At that point, or if the encounter is Easy or Moderate, the typhon balks, and it makes use of the fact that it’s capable of speaking and understanding Common, asking its foes what it is they want. It’s not going to accept “Your death!” as an answer, but it’s open to other very simple accommodations that permit it to live. Remember, we’re talking caveman Intelligence here. It can strike a concrete deal consisting of basic action verbs and common nouns (“Leave this place,” “Shun that place,” “Spare that person”), but it can’t negotiate a treaty.
Next: Theran giants.
