## Loup-Garou Tactics


The loup-garou (the p is silent, so it rhymes with “boogaloo,” in both the singular and the plural) is a werewolf with an extra-intense concentration of lycanthropy. Amusingly, loup means “wolf,” and garou is what’s left of the Old French garulf, a cognate of “werewolf.” So a loup-garou is a “wolf-werewolf.” (In modern French, however, garou is a generalized term referring to any kind of lycanthrope. You could, for example, have a lapin-garou—a “rabbit-werewolf,” or wererabbit. Probably the owner of the hole I go down anytime I start looking into etymology.)
With respect to their combat role, loups-garous (the correct plural, contra the flavor text in Ezmerelda’s Guide to Ravenloft) are uncommonly flexible. With exceptional Strength, Dexterity and Constitution, they can play the roles of brute, shock attacker and skirmisher with equal ease. Proficiency in Stealth and expertise in Perception make them outstanding ambush attackers. They have 120 feet of darkvision, making them deadly at night (it’s always struck me as odd that ordinary fifth-edition Dungeons & Dragons werewolves lack any darkvision at all), and they can Change Shape as a bonus action, meaning that if a different form suits the moment better, they can switch mid-combat without losing time.

What does each form have to offer?

In humanoid form, a loup-garou can wield a weapon. This ability is represented in the stat block by the Longsword attack action, but it has to be construed as an example, not an always-available ability, because a loup-garou’s equipment and clothing are left behind in any transformation. If a loup-garou changes out of beast or hybrid form and into humanoid form, it has to use whatever weapon it can scrounge, which may mean rolling a different damage die (but note that it deals twice as many dice of that damage on a hit). Whatever weapon it wields, its Multiattack allows the loup-garou to attack with it twice.
In hybrid form, a loup-garou has a 40-foot movement speed and can attack with Bite and Claws. Claws has a chance of knocking its target prone on a hit; Bite can transmit the lycanthropic curse. A loup-garou in hybrid form is also Large in size.
In dire wolf form, a loup-garou has a 50­-foot movement speed and can attack with Bite and Claws—but can’t speak. It’s also Large in size.

As long as the loup-garou doesn’t need to talk terms, dire wolf form is objectively best, because of the extra speed and extra necrotic damage included in a Bite hit, which increases the average damage of its Claws/Bite Multiattack to 38. Contrast that with the humanoid-form double-Longsword Multiattack, which deals a total of 26 damage on average. If it wants to talk, hybrid form still gives it some additional speed along with the Claws/Bite Multiattack.
The only reasons to assume humanoid form are (a) disguise, (b) the ability to squeeze through a space too small for a Large creature and (c) the possibility of wielding a polearm. Even a greatsword, greataxe or maul, if a loup-garou can get its hands on one, deals slightly less damage on average than Claws/Bite; but a glaive, halberd or pike can deal the same damage as a longsword wielded two-handed, with a 10-foot reach.
That may seem like a raw deal by comparison, but don’t give short shrift to the benefits of disguise. A loup-garou on the run can quickly reassume its humanoid form and—if it can find clothes to throw on—blend in with a crowd. (If it can’t find clothes, it can still dive down a coal chute or into a chicken coop.)
Disguise also allows it to hide in plain sight. In a moment alone with a potential victim, a loup-garou in humanoid disguise can Change Shape as a bonus action and Multiattack on its turn, then use its legendary Swipe action to attack once more on its victim’s turn, then Multiattack once more for a minimum of five attacks—the second through fifth with advantage, if the first one hits, because of the Blood Frenzy trait—before its victim can move a muscle. Alternatively, if the target’s initiative roll is higher than the loup-garou’s, it can take its legendary Bite action to change into dire wolf form on their turn, then Multiattack on its own, for three attacks while the target is still surprised. And that’s assuming that no one comes their rescue. If someone does hear the victim’s cry for help and come running, the loup-garou gets a Swipe on their turn, too!
This damage adds up unbelievably fast. In the former scenario (the loup-garou has the higher initiative roll), the first Multiattack deals an average of 11 slashing damage from Claws and 13 piercing damage plus 14 necrotic damage from Bite; the in-between Claws attack deals another 11 slashing; and the second Multiattack deals yet another 11 slashing, 13 piercing and 14 necrotic. Assuming no damage resistance and that all attacks hit, that’s an average of 87 damage before the target can budge; plus, even if they’re still alive and conscious, they’re most likely on the ground. In the latter scenario (the target has the higher initiative roll), the preemptive Bite deals 13 piercing plus 14 necrotic on average, after which the loup-garou’s Multiattack deals another 11 slashing, 13 piercing and 14 necrotic, for an average total of 65 damage in round 1.
Another way to look at this devastating shock attack is to consider that each individual attack deals more than enough damage to kill a commoner outright. A loup-garou that goes on a sudden rampage in a small crowd can produce as many as 10 corpses in two rounds with the sequence Change Shape (round 1 bonus action), Multiattack (round 1 action—two down), Swipe × 3 (legendary actions on the turns of three different panicking bystanders and/or intervening adventurers—another three down), Multiattack (round 2 action—two down), Swipe × 3 (legendary actions—three down). Alternatively, depending on the density of that crowd, substitute Mauling Pounce for two of those Swipes. With 50 feet of movement, a loup-garou in dire wolf form could conceivably “move past” 18 commoners and land an instantly fatal Claws attack on every single one of them. (I’m interpreting “past” to mean “within 5 feet of” and to exclude those whom the loup-garou only moves away from.)
Normally, I’d say that the Multiattacking loup-garou should observe a strict policy of making its Claws attack before its Bite attack, because of the advantage it gains from knocking a target prone, then attacking the prone target. However, the Blood Frenzy trait makes this order unnecessary: the loup-garou gets advantage on its attack rolls regardless of the target’s condition as long as they’ve taken any amount of damage. (Remember my old refrain concerning the target selection of predators: “the old, the young, the weak, the sick, the isolated and the oblivious”? For a loup-garou, add “the injured,” and move it to the front of the line, because that’s what they like best.) The distinction between Claws and Bite isn’t “first” and “second,” but rather “fragile” and “tough”: when it has a choice, the loup-garou saves its Bite for targets that probably won’t be killed in a single hit. There’s no point in transmitting lycanthropy to a corpse.
That Mauling Pounce legendary action, which allows off-turn movement without provoking opportunity attacks, is what turns the loup-garou from a brute into a shock attacker or skirmisher. It pays for itself anytime it can be used to attack three or more targets—but it’s also useful for battlefield relocation, or as an exit strategy when a loup-garou is moderately wounded (reduced to 119 hp or fewer) or worse. As with any monster with the Regeneration trait, battles of attrition work in loups-garous’ favor. When its prey fights back, a loup-garou either abandons its assault entirely (if it seems unlikely to end in anything that can be construed as “success”) or finds a hiding place and lies low for a bit, until its injuries heal up enough for it to reenter the fray. If it can tell from the outset that its enemies are both tough and implacable (its Intelligence and Wisdom are more than adequate for it to make this assessment), and it can’t avoid a clash entirely, it strikes from the shadows, hides, strikes from the shadows, hides, and so on. It takes particular pains to stay out of reach of any enemy who wields a silvered weapon, which suppresses its regenerative ability, or who can consistently deal it more than 10 damage at a time with a melee weapon. For those foes who deal that kind of damage with ranged weapons or spells, it has another prescription: charge and rend.
When a loup-garou is seriously wounded (reduced to 68 hp or fewer), it opts for discretion over valor, immediately using Mauling Pounce (if it has 2 legendary actions available to it) to move away, then Dashing when its own turn comes around. It doesn’t switch back to humanoid form until it’s out of line of sight and at least 300 feet ahead of its nearest pursuer, unless it’s in a dense, settled area, in which case it can get away with transforming a little sooner, provided that no one knows where to look for it. If its foes are unaware of its humanoid identity, it stays put and bides its time until it’s fully healed, then considers its next steps. If the jig is up, however, it waits until nightfall, takes dire wolf form, and sprints across the countryside to a new settlement where nobody knows its name.
Next: priests of Osybus.
