## Oracle Tactics


Oracles, the mouthpieces of the gods, have an interesting stat block, because it’s clearly designed for use in non­-combat encounters as much as it is for combat—and what combat abilities it does include are intended chiefly for self-defense. That may mean defending themselves against hostile player characters, or it may mean defending themselves alongside friendly PCs from other attackers.
With very high Wisdom and high Charisma and Dexterity at the top of their ability contour, oracles are best suited for a long-range spellcaster role. While it might be more interesting to have them placidly remain in one place, taking on any comers from their temple seat—the Blessings of the Gods trait seems to incentivize this, dealing automatic force damage to anyone who dares strike an oracle from 5 feet away or less—they’re wiser to keep their distance.
To tell you the truth, I’m not sure where their challenge rating of 4 comes from, because their damage output is bad. Their Eldritch Touch melee spell attack deals an average of only 6 damage on a hit, and an oracle can make that attack only once per turn. The best alternative to Eldritch Touch is guiding bolt, which deals an average of 14 damage on a hit—better, but still nowhere in the neighborhood of the 28 damage per turn that typical CR 4 monsters deal if all their attacks hit. Oracles also have extremely low hit points for their CR; they does not want to get hit if they can help it.

Their Armor Class is better than average for a CR 4 creature, but not so much higher as to make a significant difference. I can only assume that the oracle’s challenge rating comes from their Divine Insight, which allows them to impose advantage or disadvantage on three d20 tests per day. That raises their to-hit bonus from +5 to a de facto +9—if they uses their Divine Insight on their attacks and nothing else. Is that wise? Doubtful. A guiding bolt that deals 14 damage can flatten a level 1 PC or a more fragile level 2 PC, and it can seriously injure PCs as high as level 3. But the PCs will themselves be dealing 6 to 8 damage on each hit, and there will be more of them. Six or seven hits like that, and the oracle is downed. The oracle has to think about preventive measures first.
Probably, then, not only is the oracle not using Divine Insight exclusively on attacks, they may not even bother attacking every round. Especially against a smaller party, the value of taking an opponent out of the fight with hold person is sizable, and that’s what an oracle does against a charging warrior who isn’t obviously a paladin or a ranger (these classes are likely to have sufficient Wisdom to resist the spell) or a ranged attacker or spellcaster who manages to hit them for more than 8 damage. Against opponents who are likely to have higher Wisdom, guiding bolt is superior. If the oracle needs to overcome a higher AC, they can use Divine Insight to give themself advantage. For that matter, if they’re desperate and really must cast hold person on a higher-Wisdom target, they can also use Divine Insight to impose disadvantage on the save.
It’s important that the oracle stay out of their foes’ melee reach, Blessings of the Gods notwithstanding, because they have disadvantage on their guiding bolt attack roll when an enemy is in their face. Divine Insight is a valuable resource, but also scarce, and using it merely to negate disadvantage isn’t its highest and best use. Far better to use it to turn hold person or guiding bolt into a sure thing, or if that’s not necessary, to foil a perilous-looking incoming attack. With Intelligence 13, oracles can’t necessarily zero in on their enemies’ weaknesses, but they can tell a bigger weapon from a smaller one.
Oracles have no other attack besides these, and only two other combat-appropriate spells. But both of those spells—bless and healing word—have opportunity costs that most of the time are unacceptable. Bless takes an action to cast and requires concentration that’s better spent on hold person, while healing word, although it takes only a bonus action to cast, precludes the oracle from using their action to cast any other leveled spell. That rules out guiding bolt, leaving the oracle with nothing useful to do with their action but Dash or Dodge. However, suppose the PCs aren’t fighting an oracle but rather defending it, say against a handful of nasty monsters. Hold person is useless against them, so the oracle would do well to cast bless on those PC allies who form the defensive line.
Oracles don’t flee from combat. If they die of their wounds, it’s because they were fated to do so.
Next: harpies of Theros.
