## Sunfly and Dabus Tactics


Today we all get a bit of a breather, as I look at a couple of silly non-threats that player characters won’t find themselves fighting unless things have gone seriously off the rails.
But first, an addendum to my earlier post on planar incarnates, in which I wrote, “Take this chassis and bolt something interesting and plane-specific onto it.” I’ll be honest: I don’t love Planescape, although it hasn’t aggravated me quite to the same extent that the Spelljammer box set did, and so I don’t engage with the material all that much except to look at the specific monsters whose tactics I’m analyzing on any given day. As a result, I overlooked the “Planar Influences” section at the beginning of Morte’s Planar Parade, which contains exactly the kinds of plane-specific traits you might want to attach to a planar incarnate. Some of these are more interesting than others: Creatures from Hades, for instance, dampen the effects of Charisma, cause torches to go out around them and become semi-incorporeal in shadow, granting them resistance to physical damage; whereas creatures from Bytopia merely come with a few superficial visual and sound effects. Anyway, depending on what plane your incarnate is from, you might be able to get some mileage out of these.
Now back to our regular program.
Sunflies are cartoonish, flying puffballs whose only resemblance to insects stems from their antennae and the fact that they have six legs; in every other respect, they resemble sheep spun from cotton candy. The healthier the realm, according to the flavor text in Morte’s, the more sunflies there are, and the more they thrive. In this case, the “realms” referred to are implicitly the gate towns of the Outlands of Sigil, but in a moment I’ll get to ways you can subvert that (hint: they’re related to my digression above).

With Intelligence 4, sunflies are cleverer than cats and dogs but not on par with apes; they’re inflexible creatures that act strictly on instinct. They have exactly one means of attacking, their stings, and they use them only when they’re cornered or when the target is of an alignment antithetical to their own. They can glow as a bonus action, but only sunflies influenced by upper planes do, and they keep their light on all the time.
Being Tiny, weak creatures, they’re nearly always encountered in swarms, for which Morte’s provides a separate stat block. Nothing about the swarm stat block is meaningfully different except for one action, Dazzling Lights. This action is generally a once-per-combat ability (it could recharge but probably won’t) that has a chance of stunning creatures within 15 feet of the swarm, although the saving throw DC is so low that very few targets will be affected by it. Consider it a threat display—a warning that a swarm of sunflies is getting agitated enough to attack, as opposed to an attack itself. Based on the radius, a swarm of sunflies doesn’t activate Dazzling Lights unless at least three opponents are within the area of effect; based on the DC, you might even want to up that to six opponent (or all of them, whichever is less).
Sunflies are listed as “typically chaotic good,” which raises questions, such as, “Are sunflies influenced by the Lower Planes, or the lawful planes, also chaotic good?” and, “What does it mean for, say, Carceri or Pandemonium to be ‘healthy’?” The prisons are running smoothly, with few riots? The unceasing winds are howling in a fascinating Locrian mode, with lovely flat ninth overtones?
I think that if you’ve made the choice to use alignment in your campaign—and if you’re running Planescape and you haven’t made that choice, what are you even doing?—then you have to take one of two positions: Either sunflies are chaotic good by nature, beloved and looked after in Arborea, considered lucky in the Beastlands and Ysgard, viewed as a harmless minor nuisance on Mount Celestia and in the Abyss, and despised as loathsome pests in the Nine Hells; or they take on the alignment of the plane they’re from. And in the latter case, the “Planar Influences” section of Morte’s may again be worth bringing into play.
What, for instance, would it mean for a sunfly to come from the Hells? For starters, it wouldn’t be called a “sunfly”; I might instead call it a “blazefly.” Instead of antennae, it might have little goat horns. Rather than cotton candy, its body would look like a lump of tar. Its stinger would deal fire damage, and when destroyed, its body would break open to release a clutch of wriggling grubs. It would also be considerably more aggressive than an Arborean sunfly, swarming and attacking any non-devil without hesitation, and while the sunfly might fly away upon taking even a single point of damage, the blazefly would keep stinging until it was killed.
The flavor text description of dabus (singular and plural) as communicating by creating “esoteric illusory images and symbols in front of themselves” is somewhat interesting, but the illustration reducing that description to a child’s rebus puzzle turns it hokey. I think I’d use Blissymbols before doing that. Aside from their inscrutable manner of “speech,” dabus commune with the materials of Sigil itself to keep the city in working order—physically, mechanically and sometimes socially. If you’re fighting one, you’ve run afoul of the city, and that’s not just metonymy.
Dabus have 20 feet of walking speed and 30 feet of flying speed, with the ability to hover, which makes one wonder why they’d bother to walk at all; they can simply glide above the ground, and generally do. Their ability contour is that of a spellslinger, with very high Intelligence and high Wisdom, Charisma and Dexterity. Per their Physical Restraint trait, they never engage in melee combat, period. Instead, they magically summon bricks from the streets and buildings around them to clock recalcitrant targets with. If approached with hostile intent, they immediately levitate 10 to 15 feet off the ground (provided they have the overhead space, which, on the streets of Sigil, they usually will) and back away as far as they can, attempting to maintain line of sight at a distance of between 40 and 90 feet—ideally, between 60 and 90. If they’re more than 60 feet away when they want to use Grasping Ground (again, a recharge ability that will probably get only one use per combat encounter), they float just close enough to do so, then retreat again afterward.
Dabus are lawful neutral, and they won’t attack bystanders, including allies of an individual who’s provoked their ire. That character, however, is immediately subjected to Grasping Ground, with follow-up Flying Brick attacks until they get the message about how they’ve been behaving. Anyone who attacks the dabus in defense of their comrade also gets the Flying Brick treatment. If the targets obstinately refuse to learn their lesson, after three rounds or taking moderate damage (reduced to 30 hp or fewer), dabus scatter and seek backup from the Harmonium—or, if the situation is truly dire, the Mercykillers.
Next: archons.
