## Guardinal Tactics


Guardinals are associated with the plane of Elysium the same way archons are associated with Mount Celestia. They’re also more people with animal heads, which Dungeons & Dragons players these days can’t seem to get enough of. (I’m not one of these players. I’ve gotten enough of them to last me three lifetimes. But I’m a curmudgeon.)
Musteval guardians are wee little shock attackers with a brisk 35-foot movement speed and an ability contour that peaks in Dexterity. Their mental abilities are high as well, but MGs are finesse fighters first and foremost, with no ranged attack ability. Proficiency in Dexterity saving throws endows them with a sort of cut-rate Evasion ability, and proficiency in Perception and Stealth equips them well for ambush attacks.
They have three spells they can cast innately: dancing lights at will, and disguise self and invisibility once per day each. The 1-foot error bars on disguise self, unchanged in 2024, mean that a disguised MG still isn’t going to appear more than about four and a half feet tall, so I’m not sure exactly how effective this disguise is likely to be. I think you’re going to see a lot of MGs disguising themselves as halflings, gnomes and kindly dwarves. Dancing lights doesn’t have a lot of utility except in nonmagical total darkness, which I don’t imagine there’s a lot of in Elysium; in my mind, even the darkest hour of night is so full of blazing stars as to dimly illuminate the whole plane. Invisibility is broadly useful—for ambush, for mid-combat disappearance and for escape—but with only one use per day, exactly when to use it becomes a quandary.

Before I try to solve it, let’s look at their final feature, Skirmish Movement. This reaction allows an MG to back off when charged by someone it doesn’t want to engage in melee with, without provoking an opportunity attack. It doesn’t allow the MG to get out of a melee engagement it’s in already, the way a goblin’s Nimble Escape does; for that, the MG has to Disengage. So an additional question we have to answer is, whom does an MG want to avoid getting into a fight with?
Overall, an MG deals appropriate damage for its challenge rating, and its Armor Class is on par. Its hit points, however, are a little low, about one hit short of what we’d expect them to be able to absorb. We can infer, then, that MGs would like to keep out of reach of opponents who have strong melee attack bonuses and/or deal a lot of damage on a hit, if such a thing is within the realm of possibility. We can also infer that getting out of combat once they’re seriously wounded may be a high priority for them.
Let’s think about what an MG encounter looks like. One MG alone isn’t a threat to a party of level 3 or higher player characters, and few PCs of such a low level are likely to have made their way to Elysium without being born there. Level 4 is an awkward spot where one MG will struggle to fend off two PCs. From level 5 onward, any one PC is easily a match for a single MG, if not more than one. So we can generally surmise that MGs should be encountered not singly, but in patrols of at least four to six.
And, of course, MGs usually won’t be fighting PCs anyway, nor vice versa, unless the PCs are sketchy sorts trying to bust into Elysian places they shouldn’t be. Depending on the nature of the enemy threat, then, the PCs might be accompanied by a single MG ally with a Reepicheep-size personality or by an entire plucky squad. Finally, the flavor text characterizes MGs as spies.
The last question I think we need to answer is, how duty-bound are these little guys? Lawful good archons will obviously stand their ground come what may. Neutral good guardinals are … let’s say, moderately dutiful, probably not so dutiful that they’ll fight to the death, but dutiful enough that they won’t abandon an unfinished problem completely—they’ll withdraw, but with the intention of returning with backup.
What I conclude, at last, is that MGs prefer to cast invisibility at the front end of combat rather than as an escape hatch. Either a lone MG or a whole patrol begins combat invisible, either dropping their veil all at once to display to the opposition that it’s surrounded and had better come quietly, or to get the jump on an enemy for which mere detention isn’t a viable option. One MG apiece will do for foes who aren’t robust melee combatants, while two or three MGs will want to team up to oppose each more robust melee combatant, the goal being to inflict the most damage possible with that first-round surprise Multiattack. Because these are all melee attacks, the MGs can make them nonlethal if the targets aren’t fiends, undead or otherwise total rotters.
Being invisible at the start of combat also allows them to reconnoiter their prospective opponents. High Intelligence and Wisdom mean that MGs are outstanding at tactical assessment: From observation, they know their opponents’ weaknesses, and they hold back from attacking if they lack the numbers to prevail.
When an individual MG is seriously wounded (reduced to 15 hp or fewer), it Disengages and withdraws, while its allies step in to delay pursuit. As a group, they retreat when at least half of them are seriously wounded or if just one is killed—they value their comrades’ lives highly, and more than minimal losses are unacceptable to them.
Equinal guardinals, as their name implies, are big and horsey. They possess a horse’s swiftness (despite having only two of a horse’s four legs) along with extraordinary Strength and very high Dexterity and Constitution. The fact that their Con is higher biases them slightly toward toe-to-toe melee engagement, but it’s not a significant bias; if their initial attack doesn’t have the desired impact, they’re not above Disengaging, withdrawing and trying again later.
EGs aren’t subtle ambush attackers. They come barreling into combat at full speed, opportunistically throwing rocks until they reach a distance of 50 feet from their targets. There they stop, to maximize their chances of getting to launch into a Headfirst Charge on their next turn. If an opponent should close some of that distance—say, by moving 30 feet toward them—they use their greater movement speed to back up before charging, so that they can cover the full 30-foot distance necessary to deliver the extra 4d6 damage. Headfirst Charge isn’t tied to an attack action, so whether the EG succeeds or fails in headbutting its target and knocking them down, it can still follow up with two solid Fist attacks—or with a Shout.
An EG waits to use Shout, which is on a 6 recharge and will most likely be usable only once per combat encounter, until it’s within 30 feet of at least six opponents (or all of them, if there are fewer than six). In general, I think it’s wiser for an EG that’s succeeded in knocking its target prone with Headfirst Charge to follow up immediately with those two Fist attacks, because it will gain advantage on both attack rolls. Shout is for after that foe gets back up, or if the EG didn’t succeed in knocking them down in the first place. And the EG has the horse sense [rimshot] to know all this, because its Intelligence and Wisdom are both high.
EGs don’t come into play until PCs are already intermediate-level, but it quickly becomes the case that one EG isn’t enough to fill out an encounter. It needs allies, whether they be other guardinals or the PCs themselves. If there’s more than one EG in an encounter, they know to take turns using Shout and, if there are only two of them, not to use it two turns in a row.
Like MGs, EGs Disengage and withdraw when they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 37 hp or fewer) or when one of their number is slain, and unless their foes are fiends, undead or merely horrible, they attack to subdue rather than to kill.
Avoral guardinals are shock attackers with the ability to fly. Their 50 feet of movement allows them to dive-bomb a target from 30 feet up, then—thanks to the Flyby trait—soar 20 feet into the air again without incurring an opportunity attack. Like Headfirst Charge, Dive Attack doesn’t consume an action, allowing an AG to follow up with two Talon attacks against its prone target. Because its Multiattack lets it substitute casting a spell for one of its Talon attacks, if it should fail to knock its target down, it can instead cast hold person as its first “attack” in order to gain advantage on its second.
A couple of caveats on that last tactic, however. First, it’s never worth it to forgo one attack just to gain advantage on a second. The sequence involves the rolling of two d20s to hit, just as making two separate attacks does. If a player rolls hits on both of those dice, two separate attacks will deal damage twice, whereas a single attack with advantage will deal damage only once. Second, the AG has to know that the target has a low enough Wisdom saving throw modifier for hold person to have a strong chance of succeeding. Its Intelligence is high enough for it to make that assessment, but not high enough for it to make it without having had some time to observe its target. Thus, recon is necessary—which MGs can provide, or which AGs can conduct themselves as long as they can stay hidden or don’t mind being seen. (They don’t have any way to turn themselves invisible. However, notice something missing in the MG stat block? Their ability to cast invisibility isn’t tagged “self only”! Maybe it was intended to be that way, but it didn’t get printed that way, so unless and until I see an erratum—is WotC even putting out errata these days?—I’d say that an MG is free to cast invisibility on its AG buddy.)
In short, using hold person in this way requires either that the AG has allies who can also follow up with attacks against the paralyzed target or that the target’s Wisdom save mod is low enough that they’ll fail the save more than once, and thus the AG will get an additional round of attacks against them while they’re still paralyzed. Command performs the same function as hold person, with the same prerequisite, but unlike hold person, it can’t be sustained via concentration, so having allies on the field is a must.
Aside from maneuvers involving casting one of these two spells, the AG’s tactical loop is simple: Fly down to attack, fly back up out of reach (30 feet above the target if possible, but not skipping a round’s attacks to fly higher if it isn’t), repeat. It follows this pattern until it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 68 hp or fewer), half of its group are seriously wounded, or one of its allies is slain.
Next: Bariaur wanderers.
