## Fastieth and Clawfoot Tactics

What’s better than steampunk fantasy? Steampunk fantasy with dinosaurs! Eberron: Rising From the Last War includes stat blocks for two, both used by the nomadic halflings of the Talenta Plains as trained mounts: fastieth and clawfoots.
The fastieth’s name describes it accurately: It’s fast, and it has lots of teeth. According to the flavor text, they’re skittish herbivores, but they’ll fight if cornered. Their one noteworthy ability score is their Dexterity, which is exceptional, giving them the contour of a creature that strikes once, maybe twice, and then skedaddles. They’re aided in this by a 50-foot movement speed and the Quickness trait, which lets them Dodge as a bonus action, so that when they choose to run, they can both Dodge and Dash in the same turn.
Because of their speed, Disengaging would be a better choice for them than Dash, especially when surrounded by multiple melee opponents, but I don’t think they have the Intelligence to do so, and the more plausible instinctive action is to Dash. It is interesting, though, that their Intelligence is 4, greater than that of a horse (2) or even a dog or cat (3). With a challenge rating of 1/4, these scaly cuties seem tailor-made to be companions for Beast Master rangers.
Fastieth don’t attack anyone or anything that hasn’t just attacked them. They also don’t have a huge number of hit points. Unless a fastieth is a controlled mount, it flees if it takes 3 damage or more in a single hit.
If the fastieth is made with rangers in mind, the clawfoot seems made for druids to have fun with: By level 8, any druid can Wild Shape into this CR 1 beastie. It’s speedy, although not as swift as the fastieth, with the Perception-Stealth proficiency profile of an ambush attacker. Dexterity is its peak ability score as well, although it does have a respectable enough Constitution for it to fight as a skirmisher.
It gets the most bang for its action economy buck by targeting an enemy 25 feet or farther away that it already has an ally alongside. This circumstance lets it combine Pack Tactics, Pounce and its Bite/Claws Multiattack to maximize both its hit probability and its damage. The order of the Multiattack matters a little bit, but not much: By using Claws first, it can potentially knock its victim prone with Pounce, then gain advantage on two follow-up Bites even if it doesn’t have an adjacent ally to activate Pack Tactics. However, the save DC on the clawfoot’s Pounce is so low, it’s merely sprinkles on the cupcake if it succeeds. Pack Tactics is a more reliable source of attack advantage.
Clawfoots are carnivorous pack hunters, and like most predators, they don’t like it when prey fights back. A moderately wounded clawfoot (reduced to 13 hp or fewer) decides that discretion is the better part of lunchtime and Dashes away. A pack of healthy clawfoots, like other pack hunters, tries to pick off a young, old, weak, wounded, isolated or oblivious member of a group. If they succeed, they consume their prey on the spot, defending it against any creature that attempts to drive them away. While guarding a meal, they’re more stubborn, not withdrawing until they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 7 hp or fewer).
Next: A look at Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons.
