## Yugoloth Tactics: Baernaloths


Vindicated! According to Morte’s Planar Parade, baernaloths are ancient ancestral yugoloths that demonstrate, in its purest form, their order’s proclivity for stirring up strife and taking advantage of the ensuing conflict. And where does one find baernaloths, per the flavor text? Hades! Quod erat demonstrandum.
Baernaloths are legendary creatures with extraordinary Strength, Intelligence and Charisma and exceptional Constitution. Of these abilities, their Intelligence is the highest, and together with Con, it presents the profile of a support spellcaster—but since baernaloths aren’t the supportive type, we might think of them more as “tank-casters.” They don’t shy away from melee engagement, but melee isn’t the primary way they prefer to dish out pain. (At long last, a non-brute. Today must be my lucky day.)
They’re resistant or immune to all elemental damage types except thunder, as well as to necrotic and psychic damage and physical damage from nonmagical weapons (poison, too, but pretty much everything from the lower planes is immune to poison), implying that it takes a magic weapon or spells that deal thunder, radiant or force damage to grab their attention. Are there any high-level spells that deal thunder damage? Not really, aside from storm of vengeance (which deals acid, lightning and cold damage as well, types that baernaloths aren’t impressed by, and deals these damage types one at a time, in phases).
Looking at mid-level spells, however, there’s the paladin and Tempest cleric spell destructive wave, which can deal a big tranche of both thunder and radiant damage at once. Even if a baernaloth makes its Constitution saving throw—which it probably will, since it’s proficient in that save and has a +10 modifier on it and has Magic Resistance and Legendary Resistance—it will still take around 17 or 18 damage, split equally between the two types. That’s not too shabby.
The catch is, not only are baernaloths tough, they’re also smart—smart enough to know that destructive wave exists, smart enough to know who can cast it, and smart enough to make characters who might be able to cast it its primary targets. Brace yourself, pally. The baernaloth is coming for you first.

OK, if we start with that premise, where does it take us? Paladins have to pump a lot of points into Strength, Constitution and Charisma to perform all their core competencies well. That means they aren’t likely to have a lot of points left over to tuck into Dexterity and Intelligence. These happen to be common weaknesses of clerics as well. Ideally, therefore, we’re looking for tactics that target these two abilities.
Oh, no.
Despite being able to cast spells, the baernaloth has nothing that targets Dex, and its only recourse against Intelligence is the weak spell phantasmal force. Granted, it can cast that spell whenever it wants and keep it going easily—with its Con save modifier, good luck trying to break its concentration—but 1d6 damage per round is chump change. By tier 3, a paladin is going to have somewhere in the neighborhood of 100 to 150 hp. You’re not going to chip away at that three or four points at a time. The opportunity cost of casting that spell is too high. Not only that, they’re getting a +2 to (more likely) +3 or +4 bonus on their saving throws from Aura of Protection. We need something else.
A straight-up Multiattack? The baernaloth’s +10 bonus to hit is actually a little low for a CR 17 creature, and if anyone’s going to be wearing magic armor, it’s gonna be Sir Pur de Coeur. Baernaloths may not mind melee engagement in general, but if one goes toe-to-toe with a paladin, it will find itself in a battle of attrition that it can’t be sure of winning. With Intelligence 22 and Wisdom 16, it knows better than to try. It needs to change the paradigm.
It needs to use Summon Yugoloth.
Yeah, I know, I spent my whole last blog post talking trash about Summon actions, because of their probability of failure. I still don’t think that summoning allies should be left to chance; it should be accounted for in encounter planning and pre-scripted. I bring it up here, though, because it fits perfectly with the baernaloth’s modus operandi: dealing with a problem by casting a spell at it. In this case, it wants to shut down a paladin. It doesn’t have the best tools to do so itself, so what does it do? It calls for reinforcements.
Summoning another baernaloth is pointless: It would suffer from the same difficulties as the original baernaloth does. One to four mezzoloths aren’t a terrible choice at first blush, since they could lock the paladin down by ganging up on them, but their to-hit bonus is even lower than the baernaloth’s. They’ll get more chances to hit and probably land the odd blow, but the most they can really do is get in the paladin’s way and waste their time for a bit before they get cut down. Plus, they have all the same weaknesses the baernaloth has, which the pally is well-suited to exploit.
Ah, but an arcanaloth … yes. Yes. There’s our winner.
Chain lightning targets Dex. Chain lightning deals superb damage: 10d8 per target on a failed save, more damage than a pally can deal in toto with destructive wave. And an arcanaloth can cast it three times per encounter, once each with its 8th-, 7th- and 6th-level spell slots! It’s not going to bother using these slots for mind blank or finger of death. The former doesn’t apply to this situation, and the latter is going to have a poor chance of success against the pally; chain lightning is far more promising. But wait, there’s more: The arcanaloth can also cast counterspell, and it has all its 3rd- through 5th-level spell slots to do so. Paladins’ spells only go up to 5th level. That arcanaloth is going to ruin the pally’s day, countering every single spell they cast, from destructive wave down to the lowliest 1st-level smite. (Based on recent observable patterns, these antics will probably be nerfed substantially when the new Monster Manual comes out in February 2025, but as long as the 2014 MM remains in effect, we’re going to exploit them to the fullest.)
Meanwhile, the baernaloth also reserves one of its reactions each round so that it can Afflict Despair against the pally every time they take a swing at something—and it makes sure it’s always within 60 feet of them, so that it never misses the chance to do so. As for its other two reactions, it keeps one in pocket for each opponent it’s engaged in melee with, not counting the paladin. If any of them tries to get out of its reach, it makes an opportunistic Claw attack against them. If that turns out not to be necessary, it can use that reaction on Inescapable Pain instead—preferring to use it against an opponent who relies on Dex rather than Con for defense. There’s no range limit on Inescapable Pain, so it can be directed against anyone who hits the baernaloth with a ranged attack from afar, even a cheeky warlock using the Eldritch Spear invocation to fire an eldritch blast from 300 feet away. Thought you were safe back there, did you?
Tying off loose threads, after a baernaloth has summoned an arcanaloth buddy to deal with any pesky paladin it finds itself faced with, its preferred action is always Miasma of Discord, which it places so as to envelop at least four of its opponents (based on the Targets in Areas of Effect table in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide). If it has choices, it aims the miasma at those enemies with the lowest total Wisdom save modifiers. (It has Intelligence 22. It knows.) The first time it can’t use Miasma of Discord and doesn’t need to use Summon Yugoloth (either because it already did or because there’s no paladin or Tempest cleric on the battlefield making it necessary), it casts cloudkill, this time targeting four or more enemies with the lowest total Con save modifiers. When none of these three options is available or necessary, only then does it use its Multiattack, keeping its distance from heavily armored front-line warriors if it can and instead targeting the nearest foe whose flesh is easier to penetrate.
Baernaloths choose their battles carefully and fight only when they’re sure they’ll win—which effectively means that they only willingly fight if they’re in an encounter of Deadly difficulty (see DMG chapter 3). But if the player characters include a paladin, remember to calculate the encounter difficulty twice, once without including an arcanaloth and once with. If the no-arcanaloth encounter is of Hard or lower difficulty but the yes-arcanaloth encounter is Deadly, the baernaloth will talk right up until the moment it concludes that talking no longer serves its interest, then summon an arcanaloth to aid it. At that point, it’s game on.
A seriously wounded baernaloth (reduced to 102 hp or fewer) could probably fight on if it wanted to, since it would simply rematerialize in Hades if it were destroyed, but why go through the hassle when it has plane shift? Unless its foes are hanging on by a thread, the baernaloth can clearly see which way things are going and makes a graceful exit from the scene, leaving any minions it may have been accompanied by to mop things up if they can. They have to get back to Hades on their own tickets.
Next: sunflies and dabus.
