## Space Beast Tactics


Putting the “wild” in “Wildspace,” a variety of creatures make their homes in the starry deep. Like most wild animals, these creatures generally mind their own business, fighting only if you try to catch one of them or stumble into their nests.
Space guppies are flying “fish” that carry wee air envelopes around them, allowing them to serve as spacefaring mounts for tiny creatures—although they’re not smart enough to serve as independent mounts, so if they’re ridden, they’re not going to do anything except Dodge or Dash. (Thanks to their Flyby trait, they never need to Disengage.) Their only outstanding ability score is Dexterity, but lacking any ranged attack, they have no recourse except to slap enemies with their tails, then use Flyby to scoot away as far as they can get. They don’t fly very fast—only 30 feet per move—so any opponent who wants to will catch up to them easily. The upshot is, only a large school of space guppies will bother to stand their ground against any foe of any size (use “Handling Mobs,” chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide); more often, they’ll simply Dash away rather than fight. Honestly, I’m surprised that Boo’s Astral Menagerie doesn’t include a “swarm of space guppies” stat block. Since Boo’s doesn’t, I will:





School of Space Guppies
Large swarm of Small beasts, Unaligned
Armor Class 13Hit Points 27 (5d10)Speed 0 ft, fly 30 ft
Str8 (−1)Dex16 (+3)Con10 (+0)Int1 (−5)Wis10 (+0)Cha1 (−5)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashingCondition Immunities charmed, frightened, grappled, paralyzed, petrified, prone, restrained, stunnedSenses darkvision 60 ft, passive Perception 10Languages —Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Air Envelope. If it has at least 1 hit point, the school can generate an air envelope around itself when in a vacuum. This air envelope can sustain the school in its space indefinitely.
Flyby. The school doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks when it flies out of an enemy’s reach.
Swarm. The school can occupy another creature’s space and vice versa, and the school can move through any opening large enough for a Small creature. The school can’t regain hit points or gain temporary hit points.
Actions
Tail Slaps. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 0 ft, one target in the school’s space. Hit: 7 (2d6) bludgeoning damage, or 3 (1d6) bludgeoning damage if the school has half of its hit points or fewer.




Space mollymawks look and behave like albatrosses, fishing and foraging alone over wide territories but returning to roost in large colonies, probably on fancifully fertile asteroids. Despite one species being space birds and the other space fish, there’s little to distinguish space mollymawks from space guppies. They have almost the same ability contour, plus the Flyby trait and one modest melee attack, and no reason to behave any differently.
Here’s an interesting item, though: Per its Hold Breath trait, a space mollymawk can hold its breath for only 15 minutes, unlike the space guppy, which replenishes its own air envelope constantly. The implication of this trait is that anytime you encounter a space mollymawk, you’re no more than about 15 minutes away from “land,” i.e., an asteroid or moon with a stable atmosphere. Conversely, if a space mollymawk decides a spelljamming ship is a source of tasty morsels, and that ship then travels too far away from the mollymawk’s home, it’s going to become hard to chase away, because it has nowhere else to go. While a space mollymawk within reach of its home Dashes away when attacked, even if the attack doesn’t hit, a mollymawk with no safe retreat defends itself until it’s dead, keeping a 25-foot distance in between Bites and attacking only opponents who’ve dealt damage to it.
Here’s a stat block for a whole flock:




Flock of Space Mollymawks
Huge swarm of Small beasts, Unaligned
Armor Class 13Hit Points 52 (8d12)Speed 10 ft, fly 50 ft
Str13 (+1)Dex14 (+2)Con11 (+0)Int3 (−4)Wis12 (+1)Cha3 (−4)
Damage Resistances bludgeoning, piercing, slashingCondition Immunities charmed, frightened, grappled, paralyzed, petrified, prone, restrained, stunnedSenses passive Perception 15Languages —Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Flyby. The flock doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks when it flies out of an enemy’s reach.
Hold Breath. The flock can hold its breath for 15 minutes.
Swarm. The flock can occupy another creature’s space and vice versa, and the flock can move through any opening large enough for a Small creature. The flock can’t regain hit points or gain temporary hit points.
Actions
Bites. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 0 ft, one target in the flock’s space. Hit: 16 (4d6 + 2) piercing damage, or 9 (2d6 + 2) piercing damage if the flock has half of its hit points or fewer.




A flock of space mollymawks attacked where it lives stands its ground until it’s reduced to half its hit point maximum or less, then Dashes away.
The giant space hamster is a beast; the space hamster is a monstrosity. Got that? The giant space hamster has a shock attacker contour, with high Strength and above-average Dexterity. It attacks for one round, maybe two, then withdraws regardless of the current state of affairs; it’s not clever enough to use take any action while fleeing except Dash, nor does it consider the possibility of opportunity attacks when doing so. If it senses great danger to itself—not by any preternatural means, mind you, just by instinctively recognizing when its foes are strong enough to kill it—it runs immediately, without bothering to fight at all, unless it’s cornered. When fleeing, it burrows into the ground as soon as it’s gained enough ground that its pursuers are unlikely to catch up with it.
The space hamster is also a shock attacker, but it has a few more things going for it: proficiency in Perception, double proficiency in Stealth and the Escape bonus action. The skill proficiencies equip it for ambush attacks, while Escape gives it a chance to withdraw after attacking.
Figure that a player character or non-player character is carrying a space hamster around in its pocket, quietly nestled out of sight. When the character gets into a scrape and utters the directive, “Go for the eyes, little buddy!” the hidden space hamster emerges launches itself at the character’s foe, attacking with advantage from having been unseen until that moment (I’m not going to be the one to quibble over whether the space hamster attacks normally because it becomes visible at the moment it attacks—expertise in Stealth has to serve a purpose, or why bother with it?), then drops to the ground and immediately uses the rest of its movement to run for a nearby hiding place, using its Escape bonus action to Disengage if the target isn’t blinded and to Dash if it is. On its next turn, it uses its action to Hide.
Because it recharges only on a 6, it’s unlikely that Go for the Eyes will be usable more than once in a combat. But if it does recharge before the dust settles, the hidden space hamster can scamper back up the character’s leg and conceal itself in their clothing again, ready for another go.
The space hamster has a Bite attack, but it also has no good reason to use it. It deals so little damage, it’s not worth the risk to the fragile rodent’s life to attempt it. Even if it’s grappled, the space hamster is better off using its action to escape the grapple with its extraordinary Dexterity than to deliver a weak nip. (Autobiographical note: I’ve been bitten by hamsters, more than once, and feel like “1 piercing damage” doesn’t do justice to the experience, but the stat block is written as it’s written.)
Space swine are less interesting than an ordinary boar. They have no special traits and no special tactics. Wild, they fight until they’re moderately wounded (reduced to 15 hp or fewer); trained, they fight until they’re seriously wounded (8 hp or fewer). When they flee, they Dash. Their ability to fly gives them no advantage except to be able to leap over difficult terrain or gaps between ships in space, and to retreat by air instead of land.
Space eels are more dangerous, though somewhat mechanistic in their behavior. When one decides to attack, it uses Multiattack against its target, attacking with Tail Spine first. Why not Bite first, attach, then use Tail Spine? Because Tail Spine has a chance—low but nonzero—of paralyzing the target. If it works (big if), that both makes landing the Bite easier and increases the damage it deals. Once it succeeds in latching on, it can’t use Multiattack or Bite anymore; it can only use Tail Spine, so it does. If detached, it’s back to Multiattack.
That’s basically it. The space eel is mindless and inflexible. It has a normal survival instinct but no aptitude for target selection. “Space eels avoid confrontations with larger creatures unless the eels are starving,” the flavor text tells us, which means it will keep fighting until it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 2 hp or fewer), while most other carnivorous creatures would generally give up more quickly. It Dashes when fleeing because it doesn’t know how to do anything else. It will probably get taken out by an opportunity attack. So it goes. Poor, stupid eel.
Next: Fans of Dark Sun, rejoice! I saved all the Dark Sun–inspired creatures in Spelljammer for last.
