## Darkweaver Tactics


The first thing that catches my attention about the darkweaver is: It’s fast.
Its base speed is 50 feet; it also has a 50-foot climbing speed, with the Spider Climb trait. Add to these a high-Dexterity ability contour that points to a shock attacker combat role, proficiency in Perception and Stealth (the ambush predator combo) and 120 feet of darkvision, and you already have a critter that’s extremely nasty in a dark forest or subterranean environment. The icing on the cake, though, is Shadowy Form, a trait that makes the darkweaver more difficult to hit in dim light or darkness—even if the attacker has darkvision, too. We’re looking at straight horror-movie stuff, and I’m here for it.
And the horror aspects just keep on coming. The darkweaver’s Multiattack lets it fling two Shadow Webs per turn, each one up to 120 feet, grappling their targets if they hit. It can also use the Reel action to pull a creature toward itself, up to 60 feet. Its Bite attack has a 10-foot reach. What the hockey sticks is it biting with? Does it have a pharyngeal jaw that can extend all the way across a room? Aaaaaaahhhhh!

The reach of this attack means that a darkweaver can attack from 120 feet away, hit a target, yank them 60 feet toward itself, then use its 50-foot movement to dart toward them, placing it close enough to deliver a follow-up Bite—and there’s a good chance that it will still be far enough from its opponents that they can’t get near enough to fight back without Dashing, even if they manage not to be surprised.
I’m not going to mince words: The darkweaver is the first monster I’ve seen in a long, long time that I’m excited to try out, just reading the stat block. Whoever designed it pulled no punches. That’s something I’d like to see a lot more of.
It’s also a shock attacker that really can pull off an effective shock attack, thanks to the ridiculous reach and range of Bite and Shadow Web. The Shadow Web[–Shadow Web]–Reel–Bite sequence of its Multiattack means it rarely has to place itself in a vulnerable location to strike its enemies, and its speed means it can skitter hither and yon without either inconveniencing itself or provoking opportunity attacks.
Best of all, it can deal a lot of damage in a single turn. Suppose it forgoes one of its two Shadow Web attacks because all it wants today is a single victim. The other Shadow Web deals an average 16 damage on a hit; the follow-up Bite deals nearly twice that, the lion’s share of which is necrotic damage that also reduces the target’s hit point maximum. Even for intermediate-level player characters (a darkweaver is a suitable solo foe for levels 6 through 8 outside its lair, 7 through 9 within), 47 damage is a considerable amount to suffer at once. A squishier, lower-level PC might even be rendered unconscious by that one hit alone.
What I want to look at, though, is what happens after the darkweaver’s victim goes unconscious. There’s a funny thing about most fifth edition monsters whose attacks reduce their targets’ hit point maximums and cause immediate death if they reduce a target’s max hp to 0: Those reductions almost always fall well short of the total damage the PCs are taking. How, then, do you kill them this way?
The answer is, by continuing to attack them after they’re unconscious. That’s the crucial part. Their hit points may be stuck at 0, but they can still take damage, and it causes a death saving throw failure—two failures, if the damage comes from a critical hit. And any attack that hits an unconscious creature is a crit if the attacker is within 5 feet.
Plus, damage dice from a critical hit are doubled.
All right, let’s hypothesize that a party of level 8 PCs are blundering around underground, and unbeknownst to them, there’s a darkweaver lurking nearby. Like all predators, it prefers to target the young, the old, the weak, the isolated and the oblivious. Thus, it singles out the squishiest of the bunch: Gebbert Churzestab, the gnome wizard. Gebbert has only 50 hp, so that first Shadow Web/Bite combo brings him down to single digits, his hit point max is lowered from 50 to 32, and he’s yoinked off into the darkness before his companions realize anything at all is amiss.
Normally, hauling a grappled foe around with you halves your speed. Not so for the darkweaver! Rather than try to drag or carry Gebbert, it simply scurries another 50 feet into the darkness—then Reels him in the entire distance it just moved and, finally, Bites him again. (If it bothers to use either of the Shadow Web attacks its Multiattack entitles it to, it lobs them past Gebbert to immobilize the front-line allies who are running to his rescue.) Not only does this attack knock him out, it also reduces his hit point maximum by another 18 hp, from 32 to 14. Whether he succeeds on his first death saving throw or not, the next Bite will almost certainly kill him.
If poor Gebbert is only level 6 or 7, his prospects are even grimmer. Chances are better than even that the initial Shadow Web/Bite combo will bring him down to 0 hp and knock him unconscious immediately, in which case the follow-up Bite in round 2—taken from right alongside him, for an automatic crit—will deal 24 piercing damage, which doesn’t really matter, and 35 necrotic damage, which matters a great deal, because reducing his hit point maximum by 35 will surely kill him outright at this point.
Ironically, the sheer effectiveness of this attack undermines the goal of the darkweaver, as described in the flavor text in Morte’s Planar Parade, to prolong and savor the process of consuming its foe. If you want to play up this narrative aspect of the darkweaver, you should refrain from having it take the Bite action at all until its victim is safely removed to a location far, far away from would-be rescuers, which you can accomplish by Shadow Webbing pursuers, moving at full speed and Reeling the captive forward.
Darkweavers have no legendary actions, but they do have lairs, and these lairs grant them lair actions on initiative count 20. The Extinguish action ensures that Shadowy Form is effective over a greater area—a strong defensive measure, and the first thing the darkweaver does if its opponents carry any source of light. Once that’s done, Shadow Fears is the natural next step; it would be the default, except that the darkweaver can’t use it two turns in a row. Shadow Step is useful only when the darkweaver’s foes have pursued it all the way to the heart of its lair and it’s no longer concerned with bringing back its to-go meal.
A darkweaver confronted in its lair can’t enjoy its dinner and instead bends all its efforts toward destroying the invaders. Its first goal is to stay out of melee combatants’ reach, if it can. Its second is to immobilize as many foes as it can with Shadow Web. Its third is to Reel the frailest of its enemies—especially spellslingers, marksmen and other dealers of unpleasant amounts of ranged damage—to its side, so that it can Bite them into submission. Only once it’s taken out the weakest does it try to fend off the strongest.
Like most predators, darkweavers don’t care for prey that fights back. A darkweaver that’s moderately wounded (reduced to 104 hp or fewer) Dashes off into the darkness—unless it’s cornered, in which case it fights to the death. Darkweavers have no fear of low-level light spells, but because of their Sunlight Hypersensitivity, any magic that creates sunlight, such as a dawn spell or a sun blade, repulses them immediately.
Next: vargouille reflections.
