## Murder Comet Tactics


Comets are balls of ice hurtling through space, so naturally, murder comets are elemental beings of … earth and fire. I’m coming to the inescapable conclusion that I am not Spelljammer’s target audience. Nevertheless, I soldier grimly on.
The murder comet’s primary defensive ability is its extraordinary Constitution. Its Strength and Dexterity tie for second place, making it half brute, half skirmisher. The Flyby trait, always a gift to skirmishers, indicates a strong emphasis on this latter combat role for the bulk of a combat encounter. However, the Explode trait tells us that the murder comet doesn’t want to be far from its foes when it’s on the verge of destruction.
I conclude therefore that a murder comet created by an evil spellcaster—one without independent will of its own—shifts from skirmishing to toe-to-toe melee when it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 26 hp or fewer), so as to explode over the greatest possible number of opponents, but a murder comet that is an evil spellcaster, or rather the spirit of one bound to that form, takes that same circumstance as its cue to jet away, taking the Dodge action as it flees. With a 120-foot movement speed, it’s not likely to get chased down, and its high Armor Class makes Dodging an even better survival strategy than simply Dashing.

Another trait to pay attention to in this stat block is Siege Monster, a sign that the murder comet likes to destroy travelers’ ships before taking on the travelers themselves. Against an object or structure, a murder comet deals an average of 52 damage per round when Multiattacking with both Slam and Spit Fire (a mage laser with better reskinning than usual, assuming you’ve already forgotten that comets are usually made of ice). Demolishing a 400 hp space galleon will take a while at that rate, but it’s a clear and present danger to, say, a flying fish. With only 250 hp, the latter ship will be wrecked in approximately five rounds.
Ballistae and mangonels will make quick work of a murder comet—if they hit. But the murder comet’s Armor Class is 19, so the probability of striking it is only 40 percent. Plus, a ballista has only 50 hp itself, so if a crew is shooting at a murder comet with one, the smart move is to destroy the ballista. Also, a mangonel can’t hit a target closer than 60 feet; the murder comet can simply end its turn 55 feet away.
However, these judgments are beyond the ken of your typical murder comet, whose Intelligence is a mere 6. Its order of operations is unvarying: attack ship until no more ship, then attack drifting crew members, indiscriminately. Only a murder comet with its creator’s spirit bound to it may have the Intelligence to trash ballistae and stay inside mangonels’ minimum range—and only if that Intelligence is 12 or higher. If it’s 14 or higher, the murder comet has the strategic sense to take out the ballistae first. And if its Wisdom is 12 or higher, it knows to preferentially target lower-AC, higher–damage output enemies.
All these considerations aside, the murder comet’s standard attack is extremely simple: starting from about 60 feet away, fly in, Spit Fire along the way, Slam when passing by, then finish movement 60 feet away. Once it’s seriously wounded, it reduces the distance, starting and ending its movement approximately 15 feet from its nearest opponent, and within 20 feet of as many opponents as possible. It’s important to end turns more than 5 feet away from opponents, not just to avoid taking melee hits from them but also because that being that close would impose disadvantage on Spit Fire. If an enemy charges the murder comet between its turns, it Slams, then flies back out of reach (provoking no opportunity attack, thanks to Flyby), then follows up with Spit Fire.
A more intelligent murder comet may aim its Slam and Spit Fire attacks at different targets—for example, when a foe who’s squishy and perfect for murdering is more than 120 feet away, too far away to reach with Slam even if the murder comet used its full movement, but less than 180 feet away, which would put it within range of Spit Fire. A murder comet with Wisdom 14 or higher, however, is only interested in fighting crews for whom it would constitute a Deadly encounter, which essentially means including no player character above level 3 (level 4 if there are only three PCs on board). As soon as it realizes that it’s stumbled into a situation that poses a greater danger to it than that, the murder comet bolts.
Next: plasmoids.
