## Demodand Tactics


To our fiendish menagerie of devils from the Hells, demons from the Abyss and yugoloths from Gehenna Hades, I say, Hades!, Morte’s Planar Parade adds the inmates that run the prison plane of Carceri, demodands. These fiends aren’t original to Morte’s; they date back to the AD&D Monster Manual II, with a detour through the second edition Monstrous Manual, in which they were briefly called “gehreleths,” because nobody was ever going to confuse ’loths and ’leths.
Morte’s classifies all demodands as “typically neutral evil,” a cop-out that I welcome for a change, because I have opinions regarding whether a prison plane should be considered chaotic/neutral evil or lawful/neutral evil. As I’ve mentioned before, I hold the latter view, and I think the positions of Gehenna and Carceri on the Great Wheel should be swapped. But if demodands are neutral evil, it doesn’t really matter which plane is on the left and which is on the right; as long as Carceri is Hades-adjacent, neutral evil works. (Depending on cosmology, however, I might consider changing demodands’ knowledge of Abyssal to Infernal—or allowing them to speak both.)
I note this interesting tidbit from the flavor text: “Demodands that manage to leave Carceri know they’re doomed to return: a demodand that dies outside Carceri re-forms there in a torturous process that takes 2d20 days. Even those who survive on other planes find themselves eventually dragged back, pulled by some planar tether.” The fact that a fiend destroyed on the material plane isn’t truly slain, instead rematerializing on its home plane, usually means that it fights to the death without hesitation. But if we take this bit of flavor text as a given, demodands are an exception to this rule. A seriously wounded demodand is far more likely than any other type of fiend to stand down and try to strike a bargain when it’s seriously wounded.
There are three types of demodand in Morte’s: in increasing order of power, the farastu, the kelubar and the shator.

The farastu demodand’s 40-foot speed and proficiency in Perception, Stealth and Survival tell us that it’s a fast-moving hunter and ambush predator; its Boundless Movement trait marks it as a relentless pursuer of its quarry. It has 120 feet of darkvision, implying that it’s most active at night, and its ability to climb, combined with the Spider Climb trait, suggests that it lurks in trees or other high places—even on ceilings!—waiting to get the drop on its victims. Saving throw proficiencies in Dexterity and Wisdom—two of the big three—and Magic Resistance tell us that farastus aren’t afraid of spellcasters.
With extraordinary Strength and very high Constitution, the farastu is yet another in a long procession of melee-oriented brutes. (In this case, it’s not just a preference, it’s a necessity: The farastu has no ranged attack.) Its Multiattack is Claw/Claw/Bite; this order is the preferred one, since a successful Claw hit grapples, while a Bite does nothing but damage. This instance is the first in which I’m going to make reference to the 2024 revised rules, because while under the 2014 rules, being grappled did nothing but prevent movement, under the 2024 rules, it imposes disadvantage on attacks against anyone other than the grappler. That doesn’t make a significant tactical difference in this case, because a farastu encounter is unlikely to include enemies that a grappled target would wish to attack instead. In other instances, it might matter more.
Instead, let’s zoom in on the fact that creatures grappled by a farastu have disadvantage on their attempts to escape (explained in the flavor text by tarry adhesive secretions). What’s taking shape here is a picture of a monster whose function is not necessarily to kill but rather to abduct. It would be clearer if the farastu had a trait that allowed it to drag a grappled target without losing speed—it doesn’t—but the farastu does have one other trick up its sleeve, which is to cast fog cloud to haul its victim away without incurring opportunity attacks. Fog cloud is also good for shutting down advantage and disadvantage in the area of effect, but the farastu isn’t bright enough to use it in such a sophisticated manner. With an Intelligence of only 8, it relies heavily on the simple tricks it knows: track, ambush, grab, drag away. Able to cast invisibility at will, it uses this spell to improve its ability to hide while lying in wait, and also to vanish temporarily if its foes are making it difficult to get at its most desired target. It casts dispel magic opportunistically, to get rid of a buff or debuff spell that it can’t easily ignore.
Summon Demodand, as an ability with a significant chance of failure, is a waste of time. You’ve designed your encounter to be of a certain level of difficulty. If you’ve balanced your encounter on the assumption that it includes one farastu, adding a second farastu to the encounter will throw off your calculation, as will failing to add a second farastu if you were counting on having one. The 40 percent chance of summoning success is a pointless complication; the opportunity cost of risking a failed summon is too great. Summon Demodand merely gives you license to throw another farastu into the encounter when you think a second one should appear, and one of the best times for that second farastu to appear is when the first one is dragging its victim away and wants to delay its pursuers. Don’t roll. Just do it.
A farastu is seriously wounded when reduced to 78 hp or fewer, at which point it ceases hostilities (if its opponents will let it) and tries to make a deal. Unlike many fiends, it doesn’t rely exclusively on bluster and threats, since it’s not proficient in Intimidation (or any social skill). Instead, it relies on its very high Charisma to make its appeals by whatever means seem most promising.
Kelubar demodands, according to the flavor text, “prefer to do battle with words … rather than fight directly.” I don’t see any particular reason why that needs to be the case: They’re perfectly capable of holding their own in a melee rumble, and they aren’t proficient in any social skill. They are, however, proficient in Insight, giving them a leg up on knowing whether or not their opponents are playing straight with them.
Kelubars aren’t unusually fast on land, but they have a 60-foot flying speed, suggesting that they typically move in flying leaps. Like farastus, they have 120 feet of darkvision, indicating a preference for nocturnal activity, and they also share farastus’ save proficiencies and Magic Resistance. They also share Boundless Resistance, and while in their case it seems beside the point to be able to ignore difficult terrain, since they can already ignore it by flying over it, it comes into play when it interacts with Acid Fog (see below).
Their extraordinary Strength and exceptional Constitution make melee their natural mode of combat, flavor text notwithstanding. In fact, they want to pressure their enemies into engaging them in melee, because their Acidic Secretions punish opponents for landing melee hits. For problematic enemies who refuse to come any closer, there’s Spit Acid, whose 60-foot range is perfect for nearly any situation: Per the Targets in Area of Effect table in the Dungeon Master’s Guide, a 60-foot line can be expected to include two targets, and any two points define a line. If a third or fourth opponent should happen to be in the way, that’s icing on the cake for a kelubar.
Acid Fog recharges only on a 6, making it a likely once-per-encounter ability. Its 20-foot radius indicates that the kelubar should use it against no fewer than four opponents … or does it? This ability is an interesting one, because it doesn’t just deal damage or impose a debuff. What it mainly does is impair vision and movement.
Consider this tactic: Fred the paladin has placed himself between a kelubar and the party. Velma the wizard and Shaggy the ranger are hanging back, while Daphne the monk and Shaggy’s mastiff companion are on the perimeter, ready to dash to wherever the action is. It happens, however, that no two of them are more than 40 feet apart. The kelubar plonks a cloud of Acid Fog right in the center of their formation, engulfing them all, then uses its flying movement to bound into their midst—indifferent to the cloud’s toxicity, because it’s immune to the poisoned condition. Heavy obscurity nullifies advantage and disadvantage on attack rolls in the area of effect, since everyone is blinded, and since it’s all difficult terrain, allies of the kelubar’s target will have a rough time coming to their aid. (Since the cloud is spherical, I take “The cloud is heavily obscured and difficult terrain” to mean that it’s difficult terrain even off the ground. In other words, flying creatures are slowed, too—unless they can ignore difficult terrain, as Boundless Movement permits.)
Now, I can hear your objection to this tactic, because it was mine, too, at first: If Acid Fog nullifies disadvantage because no one can see, what’s the point of its also imposing the poisoned condition? No one will actually get disadvantage from it!
The poisoned condition matters because it clings to anyone who tries to leave the cloud of fog. When Shaggy realizes there’s suddenly a demodand in his face, he knows he needs to get the heck out of there, and he also knows that since he was all the way in the back, he probably doesn’t have too far to go to escape. Plus, the density of the fog means he doesn’t have to worry about provoking an opportunity attack; he can just skedaddle, and he’ll still have an action available, too. However, he still begins his turn in the fog, so if he flubs his Constitution save, he’s still poisoned for the rest of this turn and his next one. The kelubar, on its own turn, can then pursue him out of the fog. Everyone else’s advantage and disadvantage are still suppressed, but the kelubar and Shaggy can see each other quite clearly, and the kelubar isn’t poisoned. Shaggy is going to have a hard time defending himself, and his friends are poorly positioned to help.
What if the kelubar tried this stunt against Velma instead of Shaggy? It wouldn’t work as well, would it? Because Velma doesn’t defend herself using attack rolls, for the most part—she mostly casts spells that the targets have to roll saves against—so being poisoned doesn’t really affect her, right? Remember, though, that demodands have Magic Resistance, not to mention proficiency on Dex and Wisdom saves. She’s going to have a hard time putting a dent in a kelubar with a saving throw–required spell anyway, whether they’re inside or outside the cloud. And heavy obscurity doesn’t affect saving throws, only attack rolls. The kelubar’s advantage from Magic Resistance is not suppressed within the cloud.
Incidentally, don’t let yourself get led astray by the verbiage, “The cloud remains for 1 minute or until the kelubar uses this bonus action again.” A kelubar can’t just use its bonus action to move the cloud around round after round. It’s still on a recharge. When that 6 comes up, then the kelubar can move the cloud if it wants to.
With Intelligence 14 and Wisdom 15, a kelubar demodand can assess its enemies’ weaknesses and target them accordingly, and it picks its battles carefully, fighting only when it’s confident it will win. So in that respect, the flavor text speaks true: Kelubars would rather “do battle” with words … when a physical confrontation might not go their way. When seriously wounded (reduced to 74 hp or fewer), a kelubar might stop and negotiate, but then again, it might simply cast invisibility and run away. That works, too.
The same problems with Summon Demodand apply to kelubars as they do to farastus. Script the encounter how you want it to go. One thing worth noting is that farastus are immune to the poisoned condition, too, and the slowing effect of Acid Fog on other creatures makes it easy-peasy for a farastu to snatch an opponent therein.
Shator demodands have the same movement abilities as kelubars. They also possess a brute ability contour, although their mental abilities, especially their Intelligence and Wisdom, are notably higher. They have the Perception and Stealth proficiencies of an ambush attacker, though not the Survival proficiency of a tracker, and in lieu of darkvision they have 120 feet of truesight.
Two of the shator’s traits, Jailer and Liquefaction Ritual, require 1 minute to carry out, and both require the shator to remain within range of its target(s) for the entire minute. Thus, while neither of these is suitable for use as a combat tactic per se, they both offer objectives that a combat encounter can be built around, i.e., “Stop the shator from doing this thing.” However, Liquifaction Ritual does imply the tactic of flinging a great, meaty fistful of fragile glass flasks across the floor or hard ground, causing the flasks to break and additional demodands to spring out. This method of introducing more demodands to a combat encounter is much more entertaining than Summon Demodand. Like the kelubar’s Acidic Secretions, the shator’s Numbing Secretions punish opponents for engaging in melee—and for allowing a shator to engage in melee with them, from which we can conclude that baiting foes into unwisely engaging it in melee is a large part of the shator’s strategy.
Its Multiattack comprises one Bite and two Enervating Trident attacks. Bite has a save-vs.-paralysis rider, and the trident attack has no rider, so again, this order of attack is the preferred one. Inhibitory Spray, unlike the kelubar’s Spit Acid, has a 100-foot range, which complicates things somewhat. It’s on a 5–6 recharge, suggesting a strong ability that the shator wants to use whenever it can. But per Targets in Areas, the 100-foot range tells us that the shator would prefer to use Inhibitory Spray against three or more opponents if it can, and should reconsider whether to use it if it can’t. You can always find two targets to hit with a linear area-effect attack, as long as they’re close enough together, but three requires your foes to do you a favor. On the other hand, Inhibitory Spray imposes the extremely potent paralyzed condition on a failed save, which may make it worthwhile even against a suboptimal number of targets. The tie-breaker, I think, is the DC 16 Dex save, which higher-level player characters are going to have a fairly easy time beating if they have a high Dex, especially if they’re proficient in that save. That means you can cross off bards, monks, rangers and rogues, as well as all the folks who are hanging back because they count on Dex rather than Con to save their bacon. Mostly, then, Inhibitory Spray seems like something to use against front-line warriors and their close support casters, and to get as many of them as it can, the shator will probably have to maneuver to hit them with it from the side. The chance to incapacitate the front line and then wreck it with auto-critting melee attacks, even if it means paralyzing just two opponents rather than three, is worth taking.
Shators can cast both invisibility and suggestion at will, but since these both require concentration, it can cast only one of them at a time. The main use case for suggestion is to get a low-Wisdom opponent to take themself out of the fight by suggesting to them that remaining engaged seems like a risky or futile proposition. With their Intelligence of 21, shators can identify opponents’ weaknesses with pinpoint accuracy, as if they were reading the stats off their character sheets. Anyone with a Wisdom modifier of +3 or lower is fair game.
The same thing is true for anyone a shator is targeting with imprisonment (from the Jailer ability). If a shator is on the material plane to collect a target with a Wisdom mod of +4 or higher, imprisonment is an inefficient way to go about it, and the shator instead spirits the target away to Carceri with plane shift, whereupon the target will be without allies, surrounded by demodands and in no good position to resist a second imprisonment attempt if the first one fails. If the target has both high Wisdom and high Charisma, it’s a tough job, and the shator will probably decide it’s best to render the target unconscious before casting imprisonment on-site.
When a shator is seriously wounded (reduced to 78 hp or fewer), it calls a time-out and attempts to negotiate for what it wants. If it can’t get it, it gathers its demodand posse, casts plane shift and takes the whole gang back to Carceri to convalesce before they make their next attempt.
Next: baernaloths.
