## Fleecemane Lion Tactics


When they’re not shooting shampoo commercials, fleecemane lions guard places where the power of Nyx seeps into the material world of Theros. Although their challenge rating is only 3, they’re considered legendary creatures, which can take two (rather than the usual three) legendary actions per round.
Fleecemane lions are extraordinarily strong. You might expect them to be brutes, but with very high Dexterity—higher than their Constitution—they’re actually shock attackers. They’re also ambushers, with proficiency in Perception and Stealth. However, while they can make their first attack from hiding in order to gain unseen-attacker advantage, they usually don’t, because their Pounce ability is both more powerful and what makes them memorable.
In fact, although it’s not explicitly laid out in the fleecemane’s stat block, its traits dictate a fairly rigid script for it to follow. To tease out the sequence, let’s look at each of its traits.

First, Keen Smell: This trait helps the fleecemane detect its opponents before they detect it. (Note that since Monsters of the Multiverse, and in the 2024 revised rules, Dungeons & Dragons has deprecated the Keen Sense traits and switched to giving creatures double proficiency in Perception instead. That would make the fleecemane’s Perception modifier +6 rather than +4.)
Second, Spell Turning: This trait is purely passive, a nasty surprise for spellcasters but not something that’s going to influence its behavior except to make it bolder around them.
Third, Running Leap: This trait lets it make a 25-foot running long jump, which seems pretty great until you realize that its Strength alone allows it to make a 19-foot running long jump anyway. Also, all the fleecemane’s movement on its turn has to take place within the limit dictated by its 50-foot speed. If it were to jump beyond this limit, it would simply hang in midair while all its opponents took their turns, completing its movement when its turn came back around. In the first round of combat, when the fleecemane wants to deliver as much damage as it can, that would be a pretty big mistake. Instead, the main value of Running Leap is in bypassing difficult terrain (which gives you, the Dungeon Master, an incentive to include difficult terrain in your encounter location).
The essential trait is Pounce, which grants the fleecemane the ability to knock its target prone and deliver an extra attack as a bonus action provided it has a 20-foot, straight-line running start. (Running Leap makes its Pounce more dramatic, but mechanically, it doesn’t add anything. It’s all flavor.) To gain these benefits, the fleecemane lion must initiate combat when its chosen target is 25 to 55 feet away from it (25 to 40 feet if the terrain is difficult). That’s the condition that causes it to strike.
Since the fleecemane lion can’t count on an unseen attack, it needs to take advantage of surprise instead. An interesting—and poorly understood—aspect of 5E14’s surprise rules allows the fleecemane to gain a benefit even before it leaps into battle. Initiative is rolled when any creature decides to take hostile action. The fleecemane’s Dexterity modifier (and therefore initiative modifier) is +3, decent but by no means unbeatable. There’s a good chance that another creature will roll higher on initiative than the fleecemane. If they do, the fleecemane can use its two legendary actions to Roar at the end of their turn. That means that even before it shows itself, one or more of its opponents may already be stricken with the frightened condition.
But the fleecemane lion does not want to do that. Not only does the effect have a fairly low, easily resisted DC, it wears off at the end of the fleecemane’s next turn—that is, before the fleecemane’s opponents can even collect their wits enough to know what’s going on. The condition is wasted: If they can’t act, it doesn’t matter whether they have disadvantage on their attack rolls and ability checks. The fleecemane needs to save the Roar for when its opponents are about to start doing stuff. Even then, there’s no perfect moment for it: Because it ends as soon as the fleecemane finishes its turn, and because legendary actions must always be taken at the end of another creature’s turn, whoever takes their turn immediately after the fleecemane can never be frightened by its Roar. If it Roars at the end of that character’s turn, however, it at least has a chance to frighten everyone else. The only way around this restriction is to throw in a second fleecemane and to have it take its turn on a different initiative account from the first, which isn’t really comme il faut.
Having examined this tactic and ruled it out, we’re back to the simple, straightforward approach of kicking off combat with a run-and-pounce. When the target comes within range, the fleecemane lion bursts out from its hiding spot and Multiattacks (one Claw, one Bite). If the terrain is difficult, it uses the first 20 feet of its movement to cover 10 feet of ground, then uses Running Leap to clear the remaining distance, up to 25 feet more. If it succeeds in knocking its target down, it takes a second Bite as a bonus action.
Because the fleecemane is a shock attacker, it wants to maximize the damage it deals out of the gate. Thus, it uses both of its legendary actions to Claw at its target. By the time it finishes its second turn, its foes will have rallied and be ready to fight back, but Roar is still premature; the fleecemane still has important damage to do.
As guardian creatures, fleecemane lions are undeterred by injury and will fight to the death. However, if after two rounds of combat they still haven’t brought down their prey, their shock attacker nature kicks in: They make one more Multiattack, then use their full movement to back off (potentially provoking one or more opportunity attacks—they don’t have the Intelligence or the instinct to Disengage). From this distance, at the end of the turn of the next creature to act, they finally take the Roar legendary action. If the fight remains unfinished, they engage any foe who runs up to them but otherwise circle their foes with a wary eye, looking for a good opportunity to rush in and Pounce again, Roaring each round to keep their enemies frightened. It won’t keep a spellcaster from firing off a spell that requires its target to make a saving throw, but that’s OK—that’s what Spell Turning is for.
Fleecemane lions are about as smart as an ape, but that’s not enough for them to be able to size up an opponent’s weaknesses; to these Large creatures, all PCs look weak, especially the Small ones. But they do have good intuition for whether a group of potential enemies outclasses them. If an encounter with a fleecemane lion would be Easy or Medium difficulty, then rather than pounce on trespassers like prey, it emerges slowly from its hiding place, growling in warning—trying to deter them without having to fight. In this case, as soon as an opponent makes like they’re going to fight regardless, the fleecemane replies with a Roar, saving the Claw legendary actions until battle is joined. If it’s left room to Pounce on its turn, it does. But it doesn’t run; it’s a guardian, and it guards, as long as it can hold out. And it’s a monstrosity, indicating that it’s more brutal than a common beast. When it brings a foe down, it doesn’t stop attacking them—it kills them dead before moving on to other prey.
In 5E24, being surprised merely imposes disadvantage on opponents’ initiative rolls, which means a fleecemane lion’s opponents will begin fighting back immediately. Rather than have it resort to a premature Roar—it is still a shock attacker, after all, and needs to deal as much damage as it can, as fast as it can, at the outset of combat—I suggest following the example of the 5E24 stat blocks we’ve already seen and removing the saving throw from Pounce, making the prone condition automatic. You might even do the same with Roar. What’s the point of a DC of 12, anyway?
Next: Theran chimeras.
