## Mercane Tactics


Mercanes are neutral parties, traders that ply the Astral Sea and sell their wares to whoever’s buying. They’re not ones to get into a fight except in self-defense, or perhaps against someone who’s doing something disruptive to commerce. They usually travel alone—that is, without other mercanes, although they may have bodyguards or other followers, the nature of which the flavor text doesn’t specify.
The mercane’s stat block suggests two design goals: to make killing one fairly challenging, and to make sure that anyone who picks a fight with a mercane is thereby picking a fight with all mercanes. The latter is the obvious explanation of the Mercane Telepathy trait, which lets them hold telepathic conversations with other mercanes across any distance. The wording of the trait leaves it unclear whether it allows them to communicate between different planes, although the flavor text implies that it does. Make an enemy of the mercanes, through either violence or dishonesty, and best-case scenario, none of them will trade with you ever again. Worst-case scenario, depending on how badly you’ve done them wrong, they might put out a bounty on you. I bet mercanes are very good at fundraising for special projects.
As for the other thing, mercanes have a hybrid ability contour with an unambiguous primary defensive ability, Constitution, which gives them a nice hit point maximum, but some fuzziness around what should be construed as their primary offensive ability. The biggest number is their Intelligence, but the only thing this ability score seems to affect is their saving throw DC, and none of their psionic “spells” calls for one. It comes into play only in a rider on their Psi-Imbued Blade, which is a melee weapon attack. The next primary offensive ability candidates are Strength and Wisdom; as far as I can tell, Wisdom doesn’t come into play at all except in their Insight and Perception skills (in which they have expert proficiency), so I guess what we have here are Strength/Con brutes. But they’re brutes with psionic ability, who may not be interested in fighting in the first place and can use psionics to influence a battle … a bit.

Let’s break their tactics down into two scenarios, one in which they’re attacked unprovoked and one in which they draw steel in anger.
If you attack a mercane out of the blue, its priority isn’t to win the fight but to secure its goods and get the heck out of there. Outside its ship, that means first scooping up its wares and casting invisibility. (The stat block says nothing about this, but as a Dungeon Master, I’d give any mercane a large cloth—elegantly embroidered, of course—with drawstrings that allow it to be gathered up into a sack in one quick, fluid motion. Better yet, make it a magic item, and substitute a word and a gesture for the drawstrings.) Once invisible, the mercane can Dash back to its ship, resorting to dimension door if its foes can see it and are gaining on it. All it takes to induce a mercane to cut and run is a single light wound (8 damage or more); if all its opponents together can’t deal that much damage to it in a full round, it might decide instead to draw its blade and teach them a lesson, but more likely, it will simply leave more calmly.
But maybe the mercane isn’t conducting its business in port; maybe it’s moored alongside another spelljamming ship in Wildspace for some opportunistic trade. Then it has to defend not only its merchandise but also its territory and means of transport. In this effort, it will probably have the assistance of its crew, which (as I mentioned) is unspecified in the flavor text but might consist of any humanoid folk, including those presented in Boo’s Astral Menagerie: astral elves, hadozee, possibly even githyanki. The question is, how to divide the labor? Should the mercane see to the goods and let the crew fight, or should it fight while ordering the crew to see to the goods?
Let’s look at it this way: A mercane is CR 5, worth 1,800 XP. Adjusting for encounter multipliers, it’s less powerful than two CR 3 or 4 allies, three CR 2 allies, five CR 1 allies, or seven CR 1/2 allies. Also, it takes only two Small or Medium shipmates to lug as much as a Large mercane of equal Strength can. It seems likely, therefore, that the mercane would order two or three crew members to secure the goods while using its own size and might to cut boarders off from getting to the spelljamming helm. The only likely type of ship a mercane might fly is the space galleon, because—being a Large giant—it simply doesn’t fit on a flying fish, hammerhead or shrike. The mercane therefore stands its ground on the main deck, in front of the door to the sterncastle, fending off all comers with its triple Multiattack. Defending the forecastle and the cargo deck is the crew’s responsibility.
The alternative scenario is one in which a mercane realizes it’s been cheated, or is provoked to rage by a disturbance that’s interfering with its attempts to cut a deal. In this instance, it doesn’t hold back, marching straight up to the offender and striking them thrice smartly with its Psi-Imbued Blade. There’s no subtlety here, except that a moderately wounded mercane (reduced to 52 hp or fewer) casts invisibility, stays invisible just long enough for its foes to lower their guard again, then Multiattacks its target again, exploiting unseen attacker advantage on its first swing; only when it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 30 hp or fewer) does it finally withdraw, via dimension door.
Throughout the battle, the mercane remains focused on the one particular opponent who displeased it, warning others not to intervene. It doesn’t pick foolish, unwinnable fights, and if it’s less than certain that it can win a one-on-one altercation—that is, if its opponent is level 9 or higher—it leads off with a warning rather than by immediately drawing steel. But even if the offender is level 9 through 11, if they’re recalcitrant, the mercane will switch to blows if words aren’t enough. Only if the foe is level 12 or higher does the mercane hold back from trying to deal with the situation singlehandedly.
The equation is different if a mercane is displeased with a whole group rather than an individual. It will take on a whole party of player characters at once if they’re level 5 or lower, but beyond that, it knows better than to try to handle the situation without backup. Say it’s got a pair of astral elf bodyguards (CR 3): In this case, it might be willing to challenge a level 6 party. Otherwise, unless its own side outnumbers the offending side, it simply makes a disgusted noise, telepathically describes the miscreants to all its mercane friends so that they can tape pictures of them to their cash boxes, gathers up its goods and dimension doors off to someplace quieter, where a mercane can work.
Next: vampirates.
