## Planar Incarnate Tactics


Back in June (yikes), reader Natalye Leake asked whether I’d taken a look at planar incarnates yet, and I promised I’d address them once I was finished with the book I was working on, which would be sometime that month. Ha ha! Ha ha ha ha! Ha. Well, I have finished it now, finally, and I’m making good on my promise, even if I am three months behind schedule.
The first thing that leaps about about planar incarnates is their creature type, or rather, their creature type options: They can be fiends or celestials. That’s not something you see too often. It might be better to think of the planar incarnate less as a creature and more as a template for a collection of unique arch-entities.
Planar incarnates can both ambulate and fly, not exceptionally fast but faster than the average humanoid. They’re beings of extraordinary Strength, Constitution, Wisdom and Charisma, with their highest ability peaks in the first two of those, making them primarily melee brutes. It’s probably not fair to the planar incarnate that this moment is the one when my meter fills up, but I’m getting slightly tired of seeing monster after monster after monster whose two highest abilities are Strength and Constitution. I get it: It’s a dependable contour, it does what it’s supposed to do, everyone understands what it means, and a “Rrrraaaagggghhhh slam slam slam” monster is easy to run. But it’s not the only possible contour, and it gets tedious when something on the order of 80 percent of monsters use it. Let’s see more snipers, more skirmishers, more shock attackers, more magic-users. Can we do that? Please?

Anyway, to continue: The planar incarnate is immune to necrotic and radiant damage, to poison, and all physical damage from nonmagical weapons. It also has a panoply of condition immunities more commonly associated with swarms, plus immunity to exhaustion and the poisoned and unconscious conditions. (Strangely, it can be blinded, deafened or knocked prone.) On top of these, it has Legendary Resistance and Magic Resistance, so spellcasters aren’t going to give it the heebie-jeebies. If it’s concerned about anyone, it’s going to be a warrior with a magic weapon, and not the holy avenger sword that they thought was the best weapon in the entire “Treasure” chapter. Today’s winner is the sword of answering, or perhaps the luck blade, and the prize is that the planar incarnate tries to kill the wielder first. Siege Monster, of course, means that if its foes are aboard a vehicle or behind cover, the planar incarnate destroys the vehicle or cover before turning its attention to its foes.
Slam is a slam, and Energy Bolt is a mage laser. There’s an internal contradiction here, in that Energy Bolt deals more damage than Slam, but the planar incarnate is a brute, not a spellslinger; it should favor its melee attack. Is the additional damage of Energy Bolt meant to compensate for the slightly lower to-hit bonus? Let’s run the numbers. Multiplying the probability of hitting by the average damage dealt, we find that Energy Bolt deals more expected damage than Slam against AC 16 or lower, while Slam is better than Bolt against AC 17 or higher. That’s a sensible outcome, since lower-AC foes are less likely to venture within the planar incarnate’s melee reach.
What it comes down to, then, is target prioritization. Generally, the planar incarnate is more concerned with enemies who wield magical melee weapons, and they’re going to wear more armor, so it’s going to rely most heavily on Slam. Only against a long-distance foe who suddenly moves to the top of the hit list—say, M’kayla Destynee, Arcane Archer extraordinaire, who’s just struck it with an arrow of fiend slaying and may have more where that one came from—is it going to switch to Energy Bolt.
Planar Exhalation is a breath weapon, and there’s nothing to meaningfully distinguish it from the breath weapon of an adult dragon. It has the same area of effect (60-foot cone) and the same recharge, its saving throw DC is comparable, and while it deals less damage, that damage comes with the blinded condition if a target fails their save. This action is one the planar incarnate takes whenever it can; it’s too good to pass up.
The planar incarnate, like the time dragon, is another nü-D&D legendary monster in which legendary actions are replaced with reactions. Searing Gaze is … not that interesting, to be perfectly honest. It deals no damage on a successful saving throw, and since it targets Wisdom, it’s going to be disappointingly ineffective against clerics, druids, paladins, and warlocks; even rangers and monks will have a halfway decent chance of avoiding getting cooked. Rogues, fighters and fighting bards are probably the best prospective targets of Searing Gaze.
Meanwhile, Teleport is the planar incarnate’s only other choice. (I understand the danger of supermarket fatigue. Really, I do. But just two legendary reactions to choose from? That doesn’t feel very legendary.) The obvious application of this reaction is to get out of the way of a nasty magic weapon attack. But it has to happen preemptively, not reactively. Pay attention to the initiative order: The planar incarnate uses Teleport on the turn just before the fighter with the sword of answering takes their turn, to get 55 feet away from them. Why 55 and not 60? Because when its own turn comes back around, the planar incarnate wants to be able to get within 15 feet of that opponent so that it can Slam them. If they don’t move, and the planar incarnate uses its whole 40 feet of movement to close the distance again, it’s still going to be 20 feet away at the end of its move. (It doesn’t have to be exactly 55 feet: 40 feet would work fine, too, as long as the opponent doesn’t wield a long-reach weapon or have a speed greater than 30 feet, as would 45 or 50. But 55 is the maximum, and it’s the safest bet.) If the opponent immediately follows the planar incarnate in the initiative order, well, that’s just the PI’s bad luck. Maybe it will get lucky and blind them.
Because a planar incarnate is a fundamental manifestation of the principles of its plane, I think we can reasonably consider it to be a zealot and conclude that it fights until it’s destroyed.
The concept of the planar incarnate is extremely cool, but as is, the execution is disappointing. Thus, I return to my earlier suggestion that it be considered a template rather than an actual creature. Take this chassis and bolt something interesting and plane-specific onto it. I bet you can come up with at least one legendary reaction that’s better than the two on offer.
Next: demodands.
