## A Note on ‘AI’ in D&D


To everyone who’s bought hardcover copies of The Monsters Know What They’re Doing: Combat Tactics for Dungeon Masters and MOAR! Monsters Know What They’re Doing, first of all, thank you! You’ve turned this blog into something I’ve been able to support my family with.
Second, check out all those cool black-and-white interior illustrations! Awesome, aren’t they? Those are the work of my wife, Jen. Thanks to the success of The Monsters Know, Jen was able to leave a negative work environment and pursue a career in art.
That career, like the career of every other artist, is threatened by the adoption of generative “AI.”


We don’t hold with “AI” in this house. I’ve been a writer and editor for the past 30 years, and every idea I put on paper, every choice I make about how to organize them, every word I choose because I believe it to be the most precise, rich and fitting expression of my meaning, every sentence I construct, every punctuation mark I place, and every rule I break intentionally for effect is the product of those 30 years of disciplined practice. Jen has been developing her artistic skills for almost as long. Work matters. Practice matters. Discipline matters. Personal style matters. People matter. No software can substitute for any of that.
We care about protecting creative professions against the encroachment of “AI” not just for our own sakes but for others’ as well. Our landlord, whom we actually like (!), is a member of SAG-AFTRA. We have friends who belong to the Writers’ Guild of America. And, of course, we belong to a broader community of creative professionals whose livelihoods are threatened with replacement by inexpensive “AI” as relentless corporate cost-cutting degrades the quality of everything we buy, and whose creative output is misappropriated by technology companies to train their “AI” products without compensating the original creators.
That’s why, in light of the recent revelation that Wizards of the Coast chose to include artwork that was at least partially “AI”-generated in the upcoming Dungeons & Dragons book Bigby Presents: Glory of the Giants, I will not buy that book or examine any creature in it in this blog unless and until the art in question is replaced with entirely original art by a human artist.
This wasn’t my plan. I was actually looking forward to moving on to Glory of the Giants after finishing up with Spelljammer, since giant content in fifth edition D&D has heretofore been somewhat thin. The past year has already been a rough one in terms of moral dilemmas for creators in and around the tabletop roleplaying game industry, and we’ve each had to make our way through a bewildering barrage of challenges and choices. I’m not going to condemn anyone else for the choices they’ve made; we all have different bright lines and degrees of freedom to walk away from compromising situations. Some of those choices are extremely difficult. For me, though, this decision is a no-brainer. No Glory of the Giants as long as there’s “AI” art on the pages.
Why do I put “AI” in scare quotes? Because it’s false to suggest that generative “AI” is in any way intelligent. It’s a probabilistic generator of patterns, essentially the same as the Apple IIe programs I wrote when I was 18 to generate fantasy names out of three-letter combinations using custom frequency tables. For further explanation, see “ ‘AI’ Hurts Consumers and Workers—and Isn’t Intelligent” by Alex Hanna and Emily M. Bender.
See Jen’s portfolio at jencmars.com.
