## Planescape Githzerai Tactics


Hey, remember the githzerai, Lae’zel’s less belligerent but not even a little bit more chill cousins? Let’s talk about them today.
Previous githzerai have been, essentially, variations on a monk-ish shock attacker theme. Morte’s Planar Parade gives us three new ones to look at—the traveler, the uniter and the futurist—and they continue the trend, sort of.

Githzerai travelers hew most closely to the previously established pattern, with a Dexterity that’s head and shoulders above their other physical ability scores; they also have very high Wisdom, which increases their Armor Class, thanks to their Psychic Defense trait. Proficiency in Perception and Survival makes them excellent trackers, a possible hook to use if you want to bring one aboard as an ally to the party (or create a subplot in which the player characters are being hunted).
Once per day, they can cast jump, a spell that’s notoriously hard to use effectively because of how the jumping rules are written. (Here’s the math done for you: running long jump, 12 feet; standing long jump, 6 feet; running high jump, 4 feet; standing high jump, 2 feet. With jump: running long jump, 36 feet; standing long jump, 18 feet; running high jump, 12 feet; standing high jump, 6 feet.) It’s worth noting that, per Unearthed Arcana playtest materials, Wizards of the Coast appears primed to replace the current jump spell with a new, simpler version, cast as a bonus action, that lets a creature jump up to 30 feet by spending 10 feet of movement once per turn. I’ll examine how both versions affect the githzerai traveler, but in either case, it’s unlikely that it’s worth the opportunity cost to cast jump once combat has started already. This spell is one that a githzerai traveler casts in anticipation of combat.
The centerpiece of githzerai traveler combat is their Multiattack, which comprises three Unarmed Strikes that deal an average of 33 damage if all of them hit. That definitely qualifies as shocking, but what enables githzerai travelers to play their combat role to the fullest is their Matter Manipulation trait, a bonus action on a 4–6 recharge, meaning that they can use it every other round on average (but not dependably). It should go without saying that when they have it available, they use it; which option they choose depends on the circumstances.

Astral Step is a sensible default, one that harmonizes perfectly with the shock attacker combat role: rush in (movement), Multiattack (action), Astral Step out (bonus action). Presto, big pummeling damage with no risk of an opportunity attack. For added laughs, rather than teleport out of every foe’s reach, teleport right behind the backline spellslinger who always tries to stay as far away from melee as they can.
Growth is a sente-gaining move, good for a moderately wounded (reduced to 30 hp or fewer) githzerai traveler to use when they’re 30 to 40 feet away from their nearest opponent and want to prevent them from closing the distance and attacking in the same turn. Nearer than that, it won’t prevent the opponent from getting close enough to attack; farther than that, it’s unnecessary. These distances assume that the opponent’s speed is the standard 30 feet. Against an opponent who’s faster or slower, the inside distance is equal to the opponent’s speed, while the outside distance is equal to the opponent’s speed plus 10. Githzerai travelers are smart enough to gauge their foes’ speed accurately upon observing them for a round. Of course, if the ground is difficult terrain already, Growth accomplishes nothing.
Retaliating Light is an alternative to Astral Step for use when, because of a confined environment, the githzerai traveler isn’t far enough from its foes to make Growth worthwhile and either can’t teleport far enough away from them to avoid being attacked or can’t get within reach of one who wants to avoid melee engagement.

As currently written, jump generally isn’t helpful for a githzerai traveler who’s moving toward a foe, because it doesn’t increase their speed. (It’s more useful if the traveler needs to clear a gap or an obstacle or reach a higher or lower position.) The Unearthed Arcana version of jump, which we’re likely to see published in the new Player’s Handbook later this year, makes it easier for a githzerai traveler to swiftly close to melee distance, because it increases their effective speed from 30 feet to 50 feet—or even more, if any of the battleground is difficult terrain. After attacking, they can then Astral Step away and use their surplus movement to get even farther.
Plane shift, as usual, is an escape hatch, while see invisibility is a necessary use of an action if someone on the field has cast greater invisibility—or if the githzerai traveler somehow knows in advance of combat that their enemies plan to use invisibility as a tactic.
Githzerai travelers are both intelligent enough to plan their attacks, assess their enemies’ weaknesses and target accordingly, and wise enough to choose their battles carefully and fight only when they’re confident of winning. Therefore, they’re not going to initiate a combat encounter that wouldn’t be Deadly for the PCs, according to the encounter building rules in chapter 3 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide. They withdraw when seriously wounded (reduced to 17 hp or fewer), running and jumping away if that suffices and casting plane shift if not.
Githzerai uniters have strong ability scores across the board, with the exception of their merely above–humanoid average Strength. You could play them as spellslingers, but that doesn’t quite comport with the fact that, according to the flavor text, they’re pacifists by nature. Melee attacks can be made nonlethal; ranged attacks can’t. Thus, it’s more natural to play them as skirmishers. More specifically, skirmishers who run around calming their opponents down instead of killing them by a thousand cuts.
Pacifying Touch is a weird ability—not conceptually but mechanically. It targets Intelligence, with the result being that more intelligent targets are more likely to resist it, and less intelligent targets are more likely to yield to it. Doesn’t it seem that it should be the other way around, somehow? Or maybe that it should be based on Charisma, the ability score that represents force of personality? I think what’s going on here, though, is that Pacifying Touch is implicitly a psionic ability, and psionics are traditionally resisted using Intelligence.
In any event, the saving throw DC on Pacifying Touch is a modest 14, meaning that the target must have an Intelligence save modifier of +0 or lower for it to have a two-thirds chance or better of succeeding. Githzerai uniters are aware of this limitation and therefore know better than to try it on wizards or artificers—or, for that matter, druids or rogues. Because, remember, while druids and rogues may be just as inclined as everyone else in the party to dump Intelligence, they nevertheless have proficiency in those saving throws and may end up succeeding despite themselves.
The strategic upshot is that githzerai uniters spend their time running around the battlefield, whomping everyone who’s not a wizard, artificer, druid or rogue with two Unarmed Strikes and a Pacifying Touch (a sequence permitted by their Multiattack), then go around and mop up the rest with Unarmed Strikes only. They forbid melee combatants from Attacking, so that they can move on to the next opponent without having to worry about an opportunity attack; supporters and spellslingers, they forbid from Casting a Spell. (Forbidding an opponent from Dashing makes sense only if you’re worried that they’ll run away and have a reason to want to prevent that.) Marksmen present a bit of a problem for githzerai uniters, as they can attack from anywhere on the battlefield, so shutting them down—along with skirmishers wielding ranged weapons—is going to be a first priority.
Subduing opponents isn’t that difficult, but disarming them, as the flavor text suggests, requires a careful reading of the optional Disarm action described in chapter 9 of the DMG. Unlike grappling and shoving, which are their own unique attack actions that are incompatible with most Multiattacks, Disarm is an optional effect of a weapon attack—and the githzerai uniter’s Unarmed Strike qualifies. The attack roll is made as normal, but then the target gets to contest the roll with a Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. If the check equals or exceeds the attack roll, the target holds on to their weapon; if it falls short, they drop it.
It’s reasonable to assume that most martial classes will be proficient in Athletics, that rogues and bards will be proficient in Acrobatics, and that monks will be proficient in one or the other, if not both. The trouble is, this list accounts for pretty much every opponent who’s going to be wielding a weapon against a githzerai uniter (a cleric might be an exception). If an opponent’s not wielding a weapon, there’s nothing to Disarm them of, and if the chances of Disarming them are only about 50/50, why not just knock them out instead?
I can think of exactly one reason to try Disarming them anyway: magic weapons. Here’s the thing: If my enemy has a magic weapon, it’s going to add its bonus to all their attacks against me … but it’s not going to add its bonus to their ability checks. If I can use the first attack of my turn to knock it out of their hands, then use a free interaction to snatch it up—I’m attacking unarmed, remember, so I never have to worry about drawing or stowing a weapon—I can use it against them for the remainder of my turn, if not the rest of the combat encounter, and if I’m really lucky, the rest of my life. Their advantage just became my advantage. This risk is one I just might be willing to take.
However, in the event that a githzerai uniter pulls this stunt successfully, you need to decide what effect that has on their Multiattack, which as written explicitly allows only the attacks already in its stat block. Personally, as long as the swiped weapon is one that monks are proficient in the use of (i.e., a simple weapon or a shortsword), I’d simply substitute the weapon’s damage for the bludgeoning damage of their Unarmed Strike and keep the additional psychic damage. But you might not want to do that—for instance, if you hold to the view that the githzerai uniter can deliver that psychic damage only by making direct physical contact with the target. Overall, I think a lot of thorny questions are avoided by simply relying on subduing rather than attempting to disarm. Then again, you can always have a githzerai uniter disarm a foe, use a free interaction to grab the weapon—and then just keep making Unarmed Strikes with their other hand.
There’s really no situation in which the githzerai uniter should ever use Psychic Bolt, and I’m not just saying that because of my disdain for mage lasers. If you espouse a philosophy of nonviolence, why would you ever make an attack that you can’t prevent from killing someone?
Telekinesis is a tricky one. Probably the most important thing to keep in mind with it is that it’s ultimately a contest of Wisdom (the uniter’s) vs. Strength (the target’s). The githzerai uniter’s Wisdom modifier is +3. Telekinesis probably isn’t going to accomplish anything against a target with a Strength modifier equal to or greater than that, and even against a +1 or +2 Strength modifier, it’s far from a sure thing. However, against spellcasters or users of Dex-based weapons, it might have some value as a means of hauling them into reach when 40 feet of movement isn’t quite enough to get at them. Unfortunately, since it uses the uniter’s action, it precludes attacking the target immediately afterward. Fortunately, to get away again, they’ll have to either risk provoking an opportunity attack or Disengage, and if they choose the latter, the uniter’s 40 feet of movement are most likely enough to chase them down again.
Like githzerai travelers, uniters choose their battles and fight only when they’re sure of winning, so they also won’t initiate a combat encounter that wouldn’t be Deadly for the PCs. They plan their attacks with care and pay attention to their enemies’ weaknesses. They withdraw when seriously wounded (reduced to 49 hp or fewer) and cast plane shift to bug out when running isn’t an option.
Githzerai futurists are … let’s call them “psi-skirmishers,” durable mobile melee attackers who also use their brainpower to attack at range. They’re capable of limited precognition, but disappointingly, this power manifests only in their Future Insight reaction, which lets them impose advantage or disadvantage on up to three d20 rolls. Since we lack precognition ourselves, it’s hard for us to decide what rolls they should use these Future Insight reactions on, but a few sensible candidates come to mind: rogue Sneak Attacks, saving throws against being controlled or taking big damage from a magical effect, ability checks to resist being pushed into lava. In contrast, they’re not likely to get much payoff out of using Future Insight on one out of a fighter’s three melee weapon attacks—although if the fighter is a Battle Master, it might be prudent to use it on a saving throw against one of their Maneuvers.
Unlike githzerai uniters, futurists aren’t described as pacifists in their flavor text, so the only reason for them to have a compunction against using Psychic Bolt is that their Unarmed Strike does slightly more damage on average. Githzerai futurists, like their kinfolk described above, are excellent at assessing threats and vulnerabilities, and if they deem the greatest danger to come from an opponent who’s between 45 and 60 feet away, too far for them to run up and strike, Psychic Bolt it is. They’re also well aware that a Raging barbarian is going to resist bludgeoning damage, so they may as well keep their distance from the screaming meathunk and deliver a full load of psychic damage instead. Otherwise, however, their preferred means of attack is Unarmed Strike.
Githzerai futurists have a slightly larger repertoire of psionic “spells” to choose from:

Dispel magic is handy for uncasting certain inconvenient spells, particularly those that enhance their opponents’ action economies at the futurists’ expense (although you’d think that if they could glimpse the future, they’d know to counterspell them instead).
Levitate gets you out of reach of the swords and axes, but it makes you a big glowing target for the arrows. Use with caution.
Mage hand is good for petty theft, but not for poltergeisting.
See invisibility is subject to the same considerations as described above: good before combat starts, less good during combat unless someone just did a greater invisibility.
Plane shift = exit, stage inside-counterclockwise.
Scrying is interesting and useful, and doing so as an action doubly so … but not during combat. There’s stuff going on right here. Pay attention.
Slow has a big opportunity cost, but it’s excellent for nerfing two kinds of opponent in particular: martial classes, especially fighters and monks, who can attack three or four times in a turn; and spellcasters, especially wizards, who normally cast a spell every round. The speed penalty is also good against mobile rogues and rangers. (If you can make it stick against a Bladelock with the Thirsting Blade invocation, you’re golden … but good luck getting it to stick.)
Telekinesis is a lot less necessary for the githzerai futurist than it is for the githzerai uniter, because the futurist doesn’t mind lobbing Psychic Bolts at anyone too far away to punch, and if they’re out of range of Psychic Bolts, they’re out of range of telekinesis, too. And while dangling a rogue in the air is fun, it’s not necessarily such fun that it’s worth forgoing three attacks for.

Githzerai futurists ensure the continuation of their futures when seriously wounded (reduced to 59 hp or fewer).
As a final note, Morte’s recategorizes githzerai as aberrations rather than humanoids, a choice I vehemently disagree with.
Next: eaters of knowledge. Yum. Tasty knowledge.
