## Modron Hierarch Tactics


Modrons have always been silly—a whole genus of Sphereland-esque anthropomorphized shapes with sensuous lips—but at least they made some internal sense, in that lower-ranking ones were simpler and had lower challenge ratings. Morte’s Planar Parade throws even that shred of logic out the window. The higher-designation its modrons, the lower their challenge ratings. Its highest-designation modron, the decaton, isn’t even a construct! For some reason, it’s classified as a celestial.
Moreover, according to the flavor text in Morte’s, decatons are “the least of the hierarchs” (emphasis mine). Does that mean they’re the least numerous, the least powerful or, in fact, the lowest-ranking? This ambiguity, along with the implied deviation from the modrons’ systematic naming-and-numbering scheme, hardly befits what are supposed to be the most rigidly lawful beings in the entire multiverse.
Since my practice within each post is to present monsters in ascending order of challenge rating, this one is going to read pretty weirdly, because it begins with decatons.

Decatons, the medics of modron society, can walk, fly and hover. They have exceptional Strength and very high Constitution, biasing them toward melee; their Intelligence and Wisdom are high as well, making them good at target assessment and selection, as well as knowing whether or not they should be fighting in the first place. They’re proficient in Intelligence and Wisdom saving throws and are immune to the charmed and frightened conditions, making them hard to fool or manipulate with magic.
They have one melee attack Tentacle, with a 10-foot reach. Their Multiattack allows them to make three such attacks each round, and the fact that they can fly means their favorite place to attack from is in the air, just out of most op ponents’ reach. Each tentacle hit grapples its target, but this grapple doesn’t come with the restrained condition, so it’s of somewhat dubious value unless a decaton can strike an opponent from 10 feet away, keeping that opponent from reaching it with a weapon attack.
As an area-effect ability, decatons have Lightning Rays, which have a 30-foot radius and recharge on a roll of 6 only. This action isn’t decatons’ first preference, but it’s wildly powerful, each bolt dealing more damage even on a successful saving throw than a Tentacle hit deals—which is good, because the saving throw DC is a pretty low 13. A decaton will most likely get only one chance per combat encounter to use this ability, and the Targets in Area of Effect table in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide tells us that the best use case is when the decaton is within range of at least six opponents (or all of them, whichever is less), preferably hovering among and above them like a high-voltage disco ball. If it gets this opportunity, it seizes it. Even against only four or five opponents, Lightning Rays is stronger than three Tentacle attacks, but there’s the question of opportunity cost: Is a particular use of Lightning Rays as good as the potentially best use of Lightning Rays?
Decatons can cast a few spells, but the list isn’t wildly impressive. Dispel magic can no longer be used against spells higher than 3rd level, so the list of spells worth spending a whole action to cast it against is short: haste, slow, bestow curse, call lightning. A decaton can cast it at will, though, and cheerfully snuffs out any of these spells each time they’re cast, until the opponent can no longer cast them. Protection from evil and good, which a decaton can cast only once per day, is useful only in scenarios where it’s allied with player characters against extraplanar foes such as fiends, celestials, fey, or (most likely) aberrations. Against a single summoned creature of one of these types (or an elemental or undead), it’s not worth the action it takes to cast unless that creature is of a higher challenge rating than the decaton—not a common occurrence.
Plane shift, which the decaton can cast only on itself, is also a once-per-day spell, and is therefore used almost exclusively as an escape hatch. The fact that it has this escape hatch suggests that decatons do retreat from combat when they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 57 hp or fewer). If for some reason plane shift isn’t on the table or their orders prevent them from returning to Mechanus, they withdraw by Dashing if they’re within reach of just one melee opponent and by Disengaging when within reach of more than one.
Nonatons are modron inquisitors, with almost the same ability contour as decatons; their Intelligence and Wisdom are higher, but not high enough to compete with Strength for the title of primary offensive ability. They have proficiency in Investigation and Persuasion but not Insight, so they can’t identify when an interview subject is lying based on their body language or other “tells”—but based on their nature, I might allow an Intelligence (Investigation) check to substitute, skinning it as picking up on the tiniest inconsistencies in the subject’s story.
The nonaton’s default combat action is also the same as the decaton’s: three melee attacks (in this case, Arm) from the air, from a distance of 10 feet away, grappling targets to hold them at Arm’s length. However, the nonaton’s Multiattack also allows it to cast a spell or take an action called Pillar of Truth. A particular bane to druids and to Transmuter and Illusionist wizards, Pillar of Truth not only deals force damage (reducible with a successful Dexterity save) but also knocks magically altered, polymorphed or Wild Shaped characters out of their assumed forms.
Pillar of Truth affects a cylindrical volume with a height of 60 feet and a 20-foot radius. Per Targets in Areas, if a nonaton is going to take that action primarily for the sake of the damage it deals, it’s going to want to plop it down over at least four opponents. But Pillar is clearly most useful if a nonaton knows or has reason to suspect that one or more of its opponents has assumed a form different from its own—especially if that form happens to be one that flies and is airborne at the moment. When a nonaton decides to use Pillar of Truth, it does so at the start of its turn, then makes its melee attacks against its foes while they’re in the forms they didn’t mean to be in.
What if all its opponents are just being themselves, and they’re not obligingly arranging themselves where Pillar can affect four or more of them? In that case, the natural fallback is dispel magic. Unlike the decaton, which has to choose whether to spend its action on casting a spell or performing a smackdown, the nonaton is free to do both as part of the same Multiattack action, and it can cast dispel magic at will. So there’s no opportunity cost to extinguishing any pesky spell that the nonaton doesn’t want to see around anymore. Nonatons have truesight, so they won’t waste a dispel on invisibility or other two-bit illusions, but most other sustained buffs and debuffs of 3rd level or lower are fair game. As for protection from evil and good and plane shift, the same criteria apply to the nonaton as to the decaton. Nonatons withdraw from combat when seriously wounded (reduced to 64 hp or fewer).
Octons are functionaries, and you’d think by now we’d begin to see some variation in these modron hierarchs’ combat roles, but nope, it’s still pretty much the same: Strength on top, and other abilities edging slightly higher across the board. In addition to walking and flying, octons can swim, because of course the on-the-nose octopus gag had to be played out to its logical conclusion.
In this instance, the primary alternative to hovering 10 feet away and making three melee attacks is Whirlwind of Tentacles, which recharges on the standard 5–6 schedule. This action is an amazing cinematic ability: The octon places itself amid four or more opponents (per Targets in Areas) that are 20 feet away from it or closer, hauls all of them that are more than 10 feet away toward itself until they’re exactly 10 feet away, and makes two Tentacle melee attacks against each of them. (That’s not exactly how it’s worded, but given how it’s worded, that’s the best way to use it.) Kudos to whatever designer came up with this brilliant maneuver. It’s inspired in a way I haven’t seen much of lately.
If the basic criterion of being able to reach four opponents is met, the octon always chooses Whirlwind of Tentacles over its Multiattack, but if possible, it should try to avoid placing itself within 5 feet of any opponent, particularly a melee combatant. A little applied geometry informs us that if an opponent occupies or is adjacent to a space where the octon would like to be in order to execute this action, it can still pull it off by maintaining an altitude of 11 feet (5 feet of height plus 5 feet of reach plus 1 foot for good luck) and reaching out 16 feet from its space for a Medium target or 15 feet for a Small one. In grid terms, instead of reaching out three or four squares from itself and pulling targets to two squares away, the octon reaches out three squares and pulls them to one away—but remains out of opportunity attack reach because of its hovering altitude.
Octons have the same spells as decatons and the same criteria for casting them. They flee when seriously wounded (reduced to 74 hp or fewer).
With septons, we finally have a modron hierarch that’s as happy to cast spells as it is to whomp things with its tentacles; too bad it has the same limited spell repertoire as all its fellows. However, its Multiattack is a terror: four Tentacle attacks plus either a spell or the Lightning Network action. This devastating area-effect ability covers a 30-foot cube—in front of itself, not around, an important detail to remember—so a septon should position itself where it will affect six or more opponents, or all of them if there are fewer than six, before using it. At best, a target will take about as much damage as it would from a Tentacle hit. At worst, it takes twice the damage and gets stunned. The benefits of using this ability at the start of a septon’s turn, before making all those Tentacle attacks, are obvious and compelling, and septons have the good sense to aim their melee attacks at stunned opponents first.
There’s only one reason for a septon to forgo Lightning Network in favor of casting any of its lackluster spells: It’s fighting a mob of extraplanar enemies, such as demons (especially shadow demons), yugoloths, blue abishai, slaadi or jinn, that are resistant or immune to lightning damage. In that case, protection from evil and good makes some sense. When it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 81 hp or fewer), of course, it plane shifts away.
Finally, you might imagine that hextons would be slightly superior to their battlefield captains, the CR 2 pentadrones, but in fact they’re Huge CR 13 juggernauts, with both a pair of pincer-tipped arms and six tentacles. Their extraordinary Intelligence equals their extraordinary Strength, enabling them to flex seamlessly between melee and magic, and they have four uses per day of Legendary Resistance (ye gods). Plus, they’re fast (speed 40 feet, rather than the usual 30), and they can fly.
Once again, the default attack is to fly within 10 feet of an opponent and strike with melee attacks. Under 2014 rules, it doesn’t matter whether a hexton makes its Pincer or Tentacle attacks first or whom it targets with them, but under 2024 rules, there’s a new wrinkle: The target of a pincer attack may be incapacitated on a hit, and that condition now breaks a spellcaster’s concentration. ETA: Reader Boromir points out that incapacitation always broke a spellcaster’s concentration—it was simply stated in the spellcasting rules rather than in Player’s Handbook appendix A. If this rule is in effect, a hexton has a particular incentive to aim its Pincer attacks at casters who are sustaining spells and to do so before making other attacks, since the termination of a spell may ease those attacks. Despite what you might imagine, a hexton’s Pincer attacks don’t grapple; only Tentacle attacks do that, so it has an incentive to make those attacks against melee opponents who are likely to try to hit back.
Counter Magic is counterspell wearing Groucho glasses, while Lightning Rebuke is a retaliatory strike primarily for use against attackers with unimpressive Dexterity—usually, though not always, front-line fighters and support casters. Hextons get three reactions per round, and with their knack for keeping melee attackers at bay with their Tentacle strikes, they can usually feel free to try to counter any enemy spell they feel like countering. Also, of course, Lightning Rebuke is less effective against foes that are resistant to lightning damage, and entirely ineffective against foes that are immune. Hextons know better than to waste it.
A seriously wounded hexton modron (reduced to 83 hp or fewer) can withdraw by casting plane shift, but unlike other modron hierarchs, it’s much more likely to stay behind to delay the enemy while its subordinate troops withdraw, waiting to bug out until they’re safely away.
Next: the Kolyarut.
