## Starlight Apparition and Kindori Tactics


And now for something completely different: the “typically neutral good” starlight apparition, a ghost-that’s-not-a-ghost. As the flavor text notes, ghosts hang around postmortem because the time and manner of their deaths leaves them with unfinished business that they compulsively attempt to complete. Starlight apparitions, on the other hand, hang around in the Astral Plane to help others do what they need to do. Isn’t that nice of them?
In a deviation from the norm, that flavor text is essential to understanding the starlight apparition’s stat block. This creature isn’t designed for combat; it has only one damaging action, Radiant Eruption, a blunt instrument that deals radiant damage, can be used in melee or at range, and seems mainly intended for deterrence and self-defense. Its other action, Possession, may seem hostile at first glance, but it’s actually something of a gift, allowing the starlight apparition to share its knowledge with others in exchange for getting to use a corporeal person’s physical abilities for a while. It doesn’t hurt the target, other than denying them the ability to use their own body while possessed.
If a group of humanoids come upon a starlight apparition and one of them immediately goes aggro on it, it could conceivably use Possession on them right then and there, to make them stop. But that’s not what Possession is for, nor is it a great tactical decision. Possession is on a recharge and comes back only on a roll of 6. If it doesn’t work, that’s a long wait for the ability to come back. Also, ideally, the starlight apparition wants the target of its possession to submit voluntarily, failing the saving throw on purpose. Having to roll, even against a target with a modest Charisma saving throw modifier, just makes it more likely that things won’t go according to plan. Therefore, the starlight apparition always replies to aggression with Radiant Eruption instead—and targets only those who harm it.

One thing that’s unclear to me, however, is why the starlight apparition needs to possess a host, since there’s nothing that says it can’t talk to other creatures in its incorporeal form. It gains the host’s physical abilities, hit points, Armor Class and so forth, but not their skills or training, and it could just as easily provide instructions without having to occupy a host body at all. One way to resolve this issue would be to rule that the apparition can only speak through another’s mouth. Another would be to give it some useful features or proficiencies of its own. Yet another would be to have it speak—but not in any language that the PCs understand. To make itself understood, it has to show others what it means.
A starlight apparition that can’t get a hostile enemy to see reason will lose patience and withdraw when seriously wounded (reduced to 28 hp or fewer), Dashing or Disengaging depending on whether it’s in melee reach of only one foe or more than one.
Also floating placidly through space are the kindori, i.e., space whales. These are beasts of typical cetacean intelligence, fairly fast-moving—they can outpace many spelljamming ships—and able to see in the dark out to a distance of 120 feet. They, too, are peaceful creatures, indifferent to other creatures if not necessarily friendly toward them. Thus, once again, we have an attack action, Tail, and a bonus action, Blinding Eyes, employed chiefly in self-defense.
For maximum effectiveness, a kindori defending itself from other creatures backs away from its foes just far enough that they’re all included within a 120-foot cone (if this movement provokes an opportunity attack, so be it—kindori have a lot of hit points), then uses its Blinding Eyes bonus action. Finally, if the kindori constitutes anything less than a Deadly encounter for its opponents, it Dashes away. Kindori are conflict-averse and generally seek to exit a combat encounter at the first opportunity. Only if it’s more than a match for them does a kindori bother to aim a parting Tail attack at one of its blinded enemies.
The main use of that Tail attack, actually, is to whack creatures that a kindori has decided it doesn’t want riding on it. The flavor text states that kindori are big enough to have their own gravity planes and air envelopes, making them a good way for adventurers stranded in Wildspace to hitch a ride back to civilization. It’s not a good idea to antagonize a beast that’s doing you a favor like that, though. A kindori that grows irritated with its passengers uses Tail attacks to register its displeasure. (It can’t use Blinding Eyes against creatures riding on its back.)
Next: dohwar.
