## Planescape Faction Agent Tactics, Part 1


Happy 2024! May the bad taste left by the last year and the last sourcebook be rinsed from all our mouths, as we embark on our voyage through the multiverse with Planescape! (It’s gonna have to be the taste that gets rinsed out, though. The Spelljammer alternate-cover box set, for all its shortcomings, smelled wonderful. The Planescape alternate-cover box set … doesn’t. It’s kind of weird how bad it smells, honestly. Very chemical.)
Morte’s Planar Parade is the portion of the box set containing all the monster stat blocks. One thing I like about it a lot is the “Planar Influences” section of the introduction, which provides a variety of building blocks for creatures native to or influenced by the various Outer Planes. Wizards of the Coast’s setting-agnostic “multiverse” creed notwithstanding, these are the Outer Planes of Gygaxian cosmology, incorporated into but preceding the Forgotten Realms, and they’re inextricably tied to alignment as an organizing principle. They’re not compatible with, say, Eberron or Dragonlance, and they make no sense if alignment isn’t a thing in your campaign.
In addition to planar influences, Morte’s includes descriptions of how all the various fifth edition Dungeons & Dragons creature types may be found in Sigil, the City of Doors, and its surrounding Outlands, although these descriptions mostly amount to “Yes, they exist here” and “They are very big.” Interestingly, however, the bulk of Morte’s—the bestiary—skips over the majority of creature types entirely! There are no monstrosities in Morte’s, no giants, no undead, fey, elementals, oozes, plants or beasts. The only humanoids, although there are quite a lot of them, are non-player character faction agents (githzerai are included, but they’re categorized as aberrations, a choice that demands some interrogation). There’s only one type of dragon, presented—as dragons always are—in its four life stages. The overwhelming emphasis is on aberrations, fiends and celestials; the handful of included constructs are mostly modrons, the only exception being the kolyarut. I’m slightly disappointed by the fact that the number of “inevitables” in 5E has been raised from one to only two. Planescape offered the perfect opportunity to introduce more of them, but sadly, maruts and kolyaruts are probably all we’re going to get—and maruts took some damage in the transition to Monsters of the Multiverse–style design. I guess the idea that anything that can happen to player characters might be inevitable is on its way out.

Looking at the faction agent NPCs, we see that the lowest challenge rating among them is the CR 3 of the Bleak Cabal void soother. (I want to capitalize those last two words, à la the hobgoblin Devastator or the cloud giant Smiling One in Volo’s Guide to Monsters, but the editorial trend at WotC seems to be heading in the other direction now. Both of those onetime titles were decapitalized in Multiverse, and the githyanki star seer and xenomancer in Boo’s Astral Menagerie, to give a couple of more recent examples, are also treated as common rather than proper nouns.) The Bleak Cabal are existential nihilists, but their void soothers are agents of mercy in a merciless cosmos, alleviating the damage done by exposure to harmful planar energies. Their combat profile, curiously, is that of shock troops, with Strength as their primary offensive ability and Dexterity as their primary defensive ability—perhaps in order to blast nasties out of the way as they rush onto the battlefield to tend to the nasties’ victims. The force damage that their Mace and Void Bolt attacks deal bolsters that vibe.
In between their Strength and Dex, void soothers have high Wisdom, which supports their spellcasting ability: the bonus action Soothing Word, which is healing word in a different wrapper, and the once-per-day spell calm emotions. (They can also cast lesser restoration, remove curse and protection from energy once per day each, but these spells don’t call for saving throws, so it doesn’t matter what the caster’s Wisdom is.) Given the void soother’s Strength-forward ability contour, these spells have no impact on void soothers’ combat tactics, but they do tell us why void soothers are running into combat and what they plan to do if they succeed.
Superficially, their melee attack and their mage laser deal about the same amount of damage. However, the mage laser is all force damage, while the melee attack is mostly bludgeoning with a little force damage as a treat. Even post-Multiverse, many supernatural creatures still have resistance to nonmagical bludgeoning damage, and void soothers’ Dex is higher than their Constitution; these two facts point to a preference for Void Bolt over Mace. Void Bolt’s max range is 90 feet, but our combat medics need to get to their patients sooner rather than later. I have a nice mental image of a void medic starting combat at a distance of about 90 feet, advancing 30 feet (movement), flinging a Void Bolt (action) and speaking a Soothing Word (bonus action). Round 2, same thing. Round 3, they run up (movement), speak one last Soothing Word (bonus action) and give the foe a final whack with their mace (action), which is hopefully enough to do it in. It probably won’t be—at this point, we’re talking a total of only 27 damage on average, and Sigil strikes me as a place where the typical taco vendor has more hit points than that—but let’s say that void soothers only rush into situations like these when some action has taken place already, or when they have ample backup. Their Wisdom is high. They know better.
There are a couple of situational exceptions to this script, both involving calm emotions, which has a range of 60 feet and affects a large spherical area (void soothers’ other spells require touching the target). If a void soother is trying to help a humanoid, and they’re generally capable of handling themself but happen to be charmed or frightened by their foe, the void soother may forgo their attack in order to cast calm emotions and clear that condition. Alternatively, they might use calm emotions to get an attacker to stop attacking and back off so that they can administer aid without interference, but this tactic depends on two preconditions: that the attacker is a humanoid and that the void soother knows they have very low Charisma, no greater than 7 (in an abstract, descriptive sense, of course).
Given the mission they’re charged with, Bleak Cabal void soothers are probably endowed with uncommon courage and thus willing to remain under fire a little longer than prudence would counsel—in other words, they don’t retreat unless they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 22 hp or fewer). With their above-average Intelligence, they probably have some training in how to Disengage as they withdraw; if not, they certainly have the good sense to Dodge. Either of those actions is probably better for them than Dashing, especially if they have any uses of Soothing Word left.
Also CR 3 is the Society of Sensation muse. The Society of Sensation believes in the pursuit of truth through experience, which is definitely a better approach than pursuing truth through social media, but it seems to me that an agent of that faction, who by definition is supposed to advance its interests, would be more like a travel agent or booking manager than a performing muse. Then again, maybe the muse is supposed to provide experiences for unaffiliated members of the public, as a way of disseminating the truths that the society has discovered and winning converts to its point of view? Sure, let’s go with that.
If we accept that premise, though, we’re left to wonder why such a person would get in a scrap. Self-defense, perhaps, but would a Society of Sensation muse ever have a reason to attack anyone? They have beef with the Fated, the Heralds of Dust and the Mercykillers, but they’re not the sort of folk to assault a rival on sight. The Mercykiller bloodhounds are much too dangerous for them to tangle with, anyway, and a Herald of Dust remnant probably isn’t up to anything that would elicit any reaction from a Sensate muse beyond pity. A muse might, however, mess with a Fated shaker who’s pushing people around, just to ruin their day.
Muses’ primary offensive ability is Charisma, and their primary defensive ability is Dexterity: They’re spellcasters who prefer to avoid melee engagement whenever possible. Their one attack action, Beguiling Resonance, deals psychic damage from as far as 90 feet away—it can be delivered as a melee attack, too, but the Society of Sensation muse really has no reason to want to do that—and has a slim but nonzero chance of imposing vicious mockery–style disadvantage on the target’s next attack roll. They also have a bonus action, Enchanting Presence, that gives them a chance to charm any and every living creature within 30 feet, and one daily casting of the spell hypnotic pattern.
Because their toolkit is so limited, there’s not a lot of variation in their tactics, whether they’re merely defending themselves or sandbagging a Fated thug, but the order in which they use those tools matters.
Suppose a performing muse spots a Taker shaking someone down across a public square. It makes moral, narrative and tactical sense for the muse to deliver a one-two blast of Beguiling Resonance from 50 to 70 feet away, catching the goon completely off guard. Not only does it give the shaker a satisfyingly splitting headache from a safe distance beyond the range of their Commanding Words, it also disrupts their next attempt to thump their victim—giving that victim a chance to run. Why wait around until the shaker’s next turn, when they’ll get two attacks, when you can provoke an opportunity attack and be subjected to just one, with disadvantage? When the Fated shaker finally collects their wits and turns their attention to the muse, the muse can use Enchanting Presence to turn her audience into willing bodyguards. (That’s not automatic, but the muse’s Presence will affect 60 percent of a group of commoners, and with advantage on social interaction checks, per the “Social Interaction” section in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide, their cry of “Help me!” will convince 90 percent of those affected to accept at least a minor risk on their behalf, say, forming a human chain and shouting rudely at the Fated shaker; 36 percent will accept a significant risk, actually staying put when the shaker raises their Golden Rod to smack them.) When their assailant breaks the line, as a last resort, the muse can pop hypnotic pattern before high-tailing it; Dash is the best retreat action for them to take.
If the muse is attacked, on the other hand, the more pressing priority is to blunt the damage their assailant can do. Enchanting Presence has the virtue of potentially affecting not just the muse’s adoring fans but also their assailant. If they’re charmed, they can no longer attack, and the muse can make a hasty exit, while charmed fans and bystanders clog the street behind them just in case. If Enchanting Presence fails to charm the attacker, hypnotic pattern is the muse’s second choice. If neither of those measures succeeds, the muse simply runs, lobbing Beguiling Resonance back at their attacker to wear them down while evading pursuit (and making opportunity attacks slightly less likely to land). They continue in this vein unless and until their pursuer gives up the chase or they’re moderately wounded (reduced to 30 hp or fewer), at which point they stop messing around and just Dash.
With high Intelligence and high Wisdom, Society of Sensation muses are good at both assessing their enemies’ weaknesses and choosing their battles. They fight only when they’re reasonably sure they can either win the engagement outright or escape with their lives. If they aren’t sure, well, their Stealth and Perception scores make them good spies, and they can quietly soak up information and pass it along to someone better equipped to do something about what they’ve observed.
Next: Harmonium and the Transcendent Order.
