## Planescape Faction Agent Tactics, Part 4


As I work my way through the various factions of Sigil and their agents, I find myself wishing that the links between factions and their associated planes made more sense in terms of alignment. I know that alignment is an aspect of Dungeons & Dragons that many contemporary players—and even a few longtime ones—consider problematic or irrelevant, but if you’re going to be working within the Gygaxian Great Wheel cosmology, as Planescape does, you can’t just ignore it. You have to make your peace with it, and you have to try to be internally consistent in how you do so. I’ve already struggled with the dissonance between the Bleak Cabal and its associated plane of Pandemonium; two of today’s factions, the Fated and the Doomguard, also strike out-of-tune notes to me.
The types of characters who belong to the Fated—“bullies, moguls, and warlords,” according to Sigil and the Outlands—have an undeniably evil bent, yet the Fated are associated with the chaotic good/neutral plane of Ysgard, where heroes go to test their mettle, according to the Dungeon Master’s Guide. Furthermore, Sigil brazenly asserts, “There’s no inherent malice in the Fated’s philosophy.” O rly? I don’t care for a second whether or not the Fated think they’re acting out of malice when their methods include mugging and slaughter. That’s evil. End of discussion. (Side note: It’s a little weird to include “moguls” alongside bullies and warlords; rank, power, and influence don’t necessarily have anything to do with taking whatever you can grab.) If I were assigning Outer Planes to these factions, I’d associate the Fated with Gehenna. I’d also swap the positions of Gehenna and Carceri on the Great Wheel, since the oppression of prison has a decidedly lawful orientation, but I’m fighting 45 years of precedent on that, and I know when to yield.
As for the Doomguard, it’s bizarre to declare it affiliated with a D-list Inner Plane that didn’t exist before fourth edition, as far as I can tell, when the Abyss is right there. Glorying in destruction and decay? Can you get more chaotic evil than that? Yet, oddly, not only is the Doomguard not associated with the Abyss, it also supposedly has a near-monopoly on weapon manufacture in Sigil. It’s baffling to think that anyone would trust a blade made by someone who’s probably just as happy to celebrate your demise as that of the enemy you’re pointing it at, let alone someone who’d be even more delighted to watch it corrode. I’m starting to think that Sigil is the postmortem dumping ground for souls whose worldviews are too incoherent to stand up to scrutiny.

Next to these folks, the Athar, who believe that the gods are just powerful spellcasters pretending to be higher beings, are models of good sense. Let’s start with their faction agents, the Athar nulls. Morte’s Planar Parade says they “train to negate the powers of those with magic,” but let’s take their core concept and run with it—let’s say they specifically target users of divine magic. They’re not just anti-caster: They’re anti-cleric.
Athar nulls have an interesting ability contour, highest in Dexterity but also high in Constitution, Intelligence and Wisdom. On the one hand, they’re skirmishers, using Dexterity as their primary offensive ability and Constitution as their primary defensive ability; on the other hand, they’re also spellslingers, using Intelligence or Wisdom as their POA and Dex as their PDA. They can even play the shock attacker role, using Dex for both. It’s a very flexible contour, and on top of it, they have proficiency in Perception and Stealth, signifying an inclination toward ambush.
They have a distinctly roguish flavor: Avoidance trait is the same as the rogue’s Evasion class feature, and their Defier’s Whim bonus action is similar to Cunning Action, except that it doesn’t allow them to Hide—they can Use an Object instead. Neither their stat block nor their flavor text indicates what kind of objects they might carry around with them, but given their faction’s goals and their own training as agents, I think they’d probably carry items that bind or gag spellcasters so that they can’t speak or gesture to cast spells, or play dirty tricks such as shining a bullseye lantern in a caster’s eyes to disrupt their concentration or splashing paint over a holy symbol worn as an emblem on clothing. (Please note the little-known, poorly explained 5E rule that Use an Object does not include using magic items; that’s a separate thing.)
Athar nulls have a Multiattack action that lets them attack twice with their Force Daggers, which magically return to their hands when thrown, so they never run out. Throwing them from farther than 20 feet away imposes disadvantage on their attack rolls, so they initiate combat from a relatively short distance away—either that, or they take the advantage they gain from attacking from hiding and use it to cancel disadvantage from attacking at long range to make their first attack from up to 60 feet away, after which they immediately use their movement (including a bonus Dash from Defier’s Whim, if necessary) to close the distance to 20 feet or less before making their second attack. After that, they make melee attacks against targets who don’t particularly want to be engaged in melee and ranged attacks against targets who do. They use Defier’s Whim to Disengage when engaged in melee by more than one target: They may be flexible in combat, but none of the roles they’re suited for involves going toe-to-toe with multiple foes.
Three times a day, Athar nulls can use the Nullify Spell reaction, i.e., counterspell. They have no reason not to, given the opportunity, but they reserve it for the caster they’re specifically trying to shut down. If an enemy cleric has a bard buddy, they don’t use it on the bard, only on the cleric. They never let a casting of spiritual weapon finish uninterrupted.
With their high Intelligence and Wisdom, they formulate sound and flexible battle plans, accurately assess their enemies’ weaknesses, choose their battles carefully and start fights only when they’re confident of winning. They’ll halt combat and parley when moderately wounded (reduced to 58 hp or fewer) if they have good reason to believe there’s anything to be gained from it, and they retreat when seriously wounded (reduced to 33 hp or fewer).
Fated shakers are collection agents and extortionists with a curiously un-muscly ability contour. They’re not high in Strength or Constitution; instead, they’re very high in Wisdom and Dexterity and high in Intelligence and Charisma. Given their Charisma, I’m baffled that they haven’t been given proficiency in Intimidation; it seems like a no-brainer. Instead, their skill proficiency profile suggests a knack for ferreting out whether a mark is telling the truth or lying about not having the money they owe, and if they’re lying, where they’re hiding it.
They have one melee weapon attack, Golden Rod, and one ranged spell attack, Radiant Bolt. The melee attack is Dexterity-based, so Fated shakers have an equal chance to hit with either attack. Golden Rod deals slightly more damage, but their merely average Constitution, next to their very high Dex, tells us that melee isn’t really their style. However much they may enjoy dishing out punishment, taking it isn’t their strong suit. If they can, they’d much rather ensure their targets’ compliance from a distance before closing in to collect.
Suggestion is an excellent tool for this job: “Pay up now, and it will be much easier on you; I won’t have to get violent” is a simple formulation that gets it done. As long as the target has the money, even if it’s not immediately at hand, and as long as the shaker maintains concentration on the spell, the target will do whatever they need to do to fetch it and fork it over, even if it means spending social capital to borrow it from somebody else! Suggestion is often hard to make effective use of, especially in combat, but for a Fated shaker looking for a payday, it’s almost embarrassingly easy.
As for the shaker’s other once-per-day spells, fly, which grants 60 feet of movement speed, is for pursuing targets who try to run for it, while enlarge/reduce, choosing the option to enlarge oneself, is for use against those who try to stand their ground. (Both of these spells require concentration, as does suggestion, so there’s no using more than one of them at the same time.) The bonus action Commanding Words’ two options are similarly designed for distinct use cases: Grovel for those who try to flee or stand their ground in melee; Cower for those who try to fight back, but at range. It would be a mistake for a shaker to command a target they were attacking at range to Grovel, since the prone condition imposes disadvantage on ranged attack rolls.
Fated shakers can cast mage armor at will; assume that it’s on them all the time. Mage hand is for taking money from someone you don’t want to get close to, or filching it from the hiding place that the mark doesn’t realize the shaker has found already while they protest that they need a couple more weeks to get it together.
Like Athar nulls, Fated shakers have high Intelligence and Wisdom, and they approach confrontations in a similar fashion. However, they don’t stop to parley when moderately wounded (reduced to 53 hp or fewer) unless their opponent proposes it, and they accept a bargain only if it means they’ll get at least half of the money they’re owed. If seriously wounded (30 hp or fewer), they withdraw, Disengaging if engaged in melee by more than one foe, casting fly if they haven’t used it already, and otherwise using the Dodge action.
Doomguard rot blades are tough but uncomplicated brutes with above-average Intelligence and merely average Wisdom. They sensibly hurl their Entropic Javelins when their movement brings them only to within 10 to 30 feet of their targets, including when they’re pursuing fleeing opponents, and otherwise favor their Entropic Blades—unless they’re attacking in concert with other Doomguard rot blades, because while the burst of necrotic damage they can release on a blade hit doesn’t affect them, it does affect their allies. In this case, they stay 10 feet away, keep throwing javelins until they run out, and only then close the distance. If charged, of course, they don’t hesitate to switch to melee. They choose their targets carefully, but they don’t have the Wisdom to avoid battles they aren’t sure they’ll win. They’re zealots, and they don’t flee, even when they’re getting clobbered.
A Doomguard doom lord may be encountered alone or leading a group of rot blades. In the latter instance, the doom lord marches boldly into battle, while the rot blades strive to maintain a 15-foot distance between themselves and their commander in order to avoid being affected by their Aura of Doom, holding back unless there’s enough lateral space for them to advance as a line on one or both sides. Only in cramped quarters where their squad can’t maintain this spacing does the doom lord suppress their aura.
Like rot blades, the doom lord prefers to engage in melee, throwing javelins only when it can’t reach a target with its Entropic Greatsword. Any rot blades who need to maintain a respectful distance from their doom lord superior throw javelins instead. The doom lord has the Siege Monster trait that I wish Hands of Havoc fire starters had, and uses it to bash its way into places where its intended targets are taking shelter or cover.
The doom lord is every bit the zealot that their followers are. No amount of damage will drive a doom lord to flee.
Next: Mercykiller bloodhounds and Fraternity of Order law benders.
