## Relentless Killer Tactics


If you go through the Monster Manual or Monsters of the Multiverse (or its predecessor volumes, Volo’s Guide to Monsters and Mordenkainen’s Tome of Foes), there are very few fiends that aren’t also tagged “demon,” “devil” or “yugoloth.” The exceptions, and the reasons why they’re exceptions, are intriguing. Rakshasas are essentially in a category of their own, lawful evil but not devils per se. Succubi and incubi, similarly, are neutral evil but not yugoloths, and cambions are the half-humanoid offspring of fiends of all kinds. The gnoll Fang of Yeenoghu, the flind and the night hag are fiendish variations of creatures that are normally something else, either humanoid or fey. Howlers are associated with the plane of Pandemonium, chaotic evil but more chaotic than evil, and barghests come from Gehenna, a plane often associated with the neutral evil yugoloths but bending toward law. Vargouilles are creatures of the Abyss, and to be honest, I’m not sure why they aren’t considered demons; their indiscriminate willingness to migrate to other planes doesn’t exactly set them apart. Hell hounds and nightmares, their alignments notwithstanding, are fiendish beasts that serve more intelligent and more powerful fiends of any stripe. Most weirdly, the stench kow, classified as a beast in Volo’s, is considered a fiend in Monsters of the Multiverse. That must be one seriously sulfurous stench.
The relentless killers in Ezmerelda’s Guide to Ravenloft are also fiends not categorized further, and it’s implied—though not stated outright—that they originated as creatures of other types, most often humanoids. In this respect, they’re most akin not to any of the creatures mentioned above but, surprisingly, to minotaurs … specifically, to minotaurs not born of other minotaurs but rather created through a transforming ritual out of worshipers of the demon prince Baphomet. They were something else once, and now they’re … this.

In their obsessive pursuit of vengeance, relentless killers might start off with one specific target in mind, but it never stops there. Somehow, they always manage to think of someone else who needs to be punished. Thus, they leave trails of carnage in their paths.
Both types of relentless killer are strong foes, but the relentless slasher, with CR 8, is the weaker of the two. With an exceptional Dexterity score considerably higher than either its Strength or its Constitution, the relentless slasher is a shock attacker that strikes hard and fast but tries to avoid taking damage itself. Its Shrouded Presence conceals it from mind-reading magic, Divine Sense and detect evil and good, but it lacks proficiency in Stealth, so it’s not much of an ambusher. To attack with surprise, it has to rely on swift movement and its targets’ ignorance of its existence. Its best hunting grounds are forests and urban areas, where it can take advantage of obstructed sight lines and its Athletics proficiency to approach unseen across rooftops or through the tree canopy and literally get the drop on its victims, and where it can use its Vanishing Strike legendary action to teleport up rather than just away.
The relentless slasher has only one mode of attack, Slasher’s Knife, but this attack can be either melee or ranged, and the slasher’s damage avoidance strategy makes attacking at range the wiser choice. Therefore, the relentless slasher seeks to get within 30 feet—but not within melee reach—of its target, flings two Slasher’s Knives, then gets behind the best cover it can reach with its 40 feet of movement. An often overlooked paragraph in the Monster Manual states, “A monster carries enough ammunition to make its ranged attacks. You can assume that a monster has 2d4 pieces of ammunition for a thrown weapon attack, and 2d10 pieces of ammunition for a projectile weapon such as a bow or crossbow.” I wouldn’t roll for the relentless slasher’s ammo; just give it eight knives, period, and a fetching bandolier to tote them in.
Between turns, it could keep attacking with its Slice legendary action, but under no circumstances should it do so, because Slice is not Slasher’s Knife. One hit with Slasher’s Knife deals an average of 6.5 slashing damage plus 21 necrotic damage, a total of 27.5 damage; also, the wounds from this attack linger, causing the target to lose hit points each turn. In contrast, three Slice hits deal a total of 22.5 damage and cause no additional hit point loss. Plus, Vanishing Strike includes not only a Slasher’s Knife attack but also a short-range teleport. The relentless slasher, with its high Intelligence, is plenty smart enough to know that one Vanishing Strike, despite costing 3 legendary actions, is significantly better than spending those legendary actions to Slice three times.
That Intelligence also gives the slasher a keen read on the order of battle. It pays attention to initiative order, and after just one round of combat in which it can see all the participants (note its 120 feet of darkvision—it strikes at night whenever possible), it knows whose turn is next at any given time. Therefore, starting in round 2, it times its Vanishing Strike so that it zops away just before the opposing side’s most powerful melee fighter can get to it.
Though tactically slippery, the relentless slasher is too obsessed with murder to save its own skin. It fights until it kills its target—all the way, three failed death saves, no half-measures—or is killed itself, whichever comes first.
The relentless juggernaut, at CR 12 the stronger of the two, isn’t as fast as the relentless slasher, nor is it as smart, but it’s a fearless brute, with a strong preference for in-your-face melee. It regenerates hit points at the start of every turn unless it takes radiant damage.
Its Multiattack allows a variety of different options: Executioner’s Pick × 2, Fist × 2, Fist/Executioner’s Pick, Fist/Deadly Shaping or Executioner’s Pick/Deadly Shaping. So many to choose from!
Executioner’s Pick deals an average of 17 damage on a hit and temporarily slows the target, which is good for keeping a victim from running away, but it has no other rider beyond that. Fist deals an average of 11.5 damage on a hit but can knock the target prone, which is why I list Fist/Executioner’s Pick as an option but not Executioner’s Pick/Fist: If it’s going to use Fist, it wants to use it first, so that it can have advantage on its follow-up attack roll. (Note that by knocking the target prone, Fist effectively also reduces its target’s speed by half—they have to either spend the other half to get back up or crawl at half speed.)
Is Fist worth it, given that Executioner’s Pick deals 55 percent more damage on average? That depends on whether the advantage granted by a prone target increases the damage by the same amount or more. The expected damage of Executioner’s Pick—that is, the damage dealt on a hit times the likelihood of hitting—is 17x, where x is the hit probability. If Fist misses, the probability of Executioner’s Pick hitting remains the same, whereas if Fist hits, it goes up. If xa is the probability of hitting with advantage, we want x(11.5 + 17xa) + (1 − x)(17x) to be greater than or equal to 2 × 17x. Unfortunately, that’s true only when x is negative. Fist, therefore, is worth it only if the relentless juggernaut is disarmed. The juggernaut’s Intelligence is only a caveman-level 8, but “attack with weapon” being consistently better than “attack with fist” is surely not beyond a caveman’s reasoning capability.
Deadly Shaping, however, is always worth it—if it’s available. In fact, thanks to the structure of the relentless juggernaut’s Multiattack, it’s usable in the first round of combat even if the juggernaut is attacking unseen, because it can make an initial Executioner’s Pick attack with unseen attacker advantage and then follow up with Deadly Shaping. Here, again, we have two options to choose between: Flying Stone and Scything Shrapnel. Flying Stone deals more immediate damage and prevents the target from fighting back for a round, while Scything Shrapnel deals more damage over time. We need a very simple heuristic to fit the relentless juggernaut’s caveman brain, and here it is: Flying Stone against melee opponents who’ll stand and fight back, Scything Shrapnel against weaklings and against melee opponents who’ll try to slip away. That’s straightforward, sensible and not too taxing on this otherwise highly inflexible fighter.
Which legendary action to use on any given turn is also a simple choice. The ability to recharge Deadly Shaping at will, even if it costs all 3 legendary actions to do it, is an amazing one to have. Implacable Advance is also fantastic—the juggernaut bashes its way through whatever shelter its target is taking, dealing enough damage with each legendary blow to smash a large, resilient object into matchsticks. It’s situational, however, making sense only when the juggernaut’s target has barricaded themself behind cover that it can’t get around any other way.
The relentless juggernaut shares its more agile cousin’s long-range darkvision and, therefore, its preference for stalking its prey at night, and its compulsion is equally strong. Nothing with the name “relentless juggernaut” is ever going to run away from a fight.
Next: carrionettes.
