## Plasmoid Tactics


Ooey, gooey, rich and chewy inside … and outside! Meet everyone’s favorite sapient blob-folk, the plasmoids!
Protean in form, plasmoids are … well, we don’t really know what they’re like, personality-wise, because neither Boo’s Astral Menagerie nor the Astral Adventurer’s Guide tells us. In its laudable but stumbling attempts to move away from the ham-handed bioessentialism of the past, Wizards of the Coast swings too far in the other direction in Spelljammer, giving us no guidance whatsoever as to what kinds of worldviews plasmoids or most of its other playable species possess. (The exceptions are astral elves and hadozee, and what happened with the hadozee illustrates why this issue is such a lightning rod. Post-errata, the hadozee are largely blank slates as well.) Since plasmoids are a new addition to Dungeons & Dragons canon, we have nothing from past editions to draw on, and even the “How to Play a Plasmoid” articles available online have to resort to rambling verbiage to disguise the fact that they have no real advice to offer. What does one plasmoid have in common with another, besides their physical composition? Maybe plenty, maybe nothing; we have no idea.

We may not know when or why they fight, but we can make some deductions about how, starting with the plasmoid warrior, which can thicken its integument to give it a couple of points’ worth of natural armor. With Strength as their primary offensive ability and a balance between Dexterity and Constitution, plasmoid warriors are flexible melee combatants, equally happy to remain engaged with a single foe or to move elsewhere on the battlefield when a chance to land some extra damage presents itself.
As written, the plasmoid warrior carries a spear and can substitute it for one of the three Pseudopod attacks that make up its Multiattack, and a spear wielded two-handed deals slightly more damage. “But wait,” you may be saying, “it can’t wield the spear two-handed if it’s carrying a shield.” I disagree. The plasmoid warrior is an amorphous ooze. It can have as many arms as it wants. It can carry a shield and wield a spear two-handed and hold a pistol and clobber you with an additional blobby arm besides. The only limit is its Multiattack, which tells us it gets three Pseudopod attacks, unless it decides to make one of them a Spear or Pistol attack instead.
That said, however, both Spear and Pseudopod are preferable to Pistol, because the plasmoid warrior is a melee combatant by preference, and because it has a slightly poorer chance to hit with the Pistol, even when it doesn’t have disadvantage on the attack roll because of an active enemy next to it. Most of the time, the plasmoid warrior’s attack sequence is Pseudopod/Pseudopod/Spear, but when it hasn’t gotten within reach of a foe yet, or when it’s just finished one off and doesn’t have enough movement to close with another, it fires the pistol so as not to waste the opportunity. If battle is just starting, however, and the plasmoid warrior can’t get within 30 feet of a foe with its movement alone, rather than use its action to make a Pistol attack with disadvantage due to range, it takes the Dash action, in order to get closer faster.
Plasmoid warriors have the Hold Breath trait, allowing them to endure airlessness for up to an hour. In Wildspace, this is useful for traversing space between spelljamming ships. A crew of plasmoid pirates can run silent and dark, spot a well-lit prize ship from a distance, use their Stealth proficiency to cross the gap between the ships’ atmospheric envelopes and catch their prey off guard. (The main purpose of their Athletics proficiency, as far as I can tell, is to help them resist being grappled, because of course a blob creature should be hard to hold on to.)
Without knowing anything more about why plasmoids fight, it’s hard to say what amount of damage would induce them to withdraw. If they’re looking for easy wins, they may be easily deterred, retreating when moderately wounded (reduced to 49 hp or fewer). If they’re committed to a fight, they may hold out until they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 28 hp or fewer). If they’re fighting for a cause or believe their opponents won’t take prisoners, they may fight to the death. When they do withdraw, they take the Dodge action as they move away.
The plasmoid boss is a tough brute that’s happy to engage in melee combat, even though it can reasonably be expected to surround itself with underlings who would defend it if it wanted them to. The thing is, it doesn’t have to choose. Being Large rather than Medium in size, and having a 10-foot reach on its Pseudopod attack, it can position itself right behind a couple of plasmoid warriors and attack over their heads. The target of such an attack might arguably have +2 to its Armor Class because of the cover the warriors provide, but the plasmoid boss makes its Pseudopod attacks with advantage when it has one or more allies within 10 feet, so it comes out ahead.
It lacks Stealth proficiency, so it probably won’t be coming along on any boarding raids, at least not until battle has already started. More often, the PCs will come to it, rather than it coming to the PCs. But if a crew attacked by plasmoid warriors surrenders—or fights them to a stalemate—a plasmoid boss is the one that will handle the negotiations, because it’s equipped with all the social skills and deploys them as needed. For good-faith bargaining, Persuasion; for displays of dominance meant to elicit compliance without struggle, Intimidation; for bluffing and double-dealing, Deception.
Plasmoid bosses value their lives and their status and won’t throw those away on a fight to the death. More cowardly sorts withdraw when moderately wounded (reduced to 57 hp or fewer), letting their warriors run interference to delay pursuit; stouthearted bosses will keep fighting until they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 32 hp or fewer). Because of Uncanny Dodge, plasmoid bosses don’t need to take the Dodge action when they withdraw; instead, they Disengage when they’re within reach of an enemy and Dash when they’re in the clear.
Player characters are unlikely to find themselves fighting a plasmoid explorer; it’s more likely that they’ll have one as a sidekick (see Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything, chapter 4). Plasmoid explorers’ physical ability scores aren’t high—their Strength is slightly ahead of their Dex and Con, but not enough to make a difference on a roll. Their most salient score is their Wisdom, which they don’t use offensively. It enhances their proficiency in Perception and Survival, making them good trackers and shot callers, but mainly it lets them act as guides to Wildspace, assessing the danger level of encounters and advising PCs on whether they ought to fight, flee or talk.
When they do enter combat, they engage in direct melee, but always alongside an ally, never off on their own. Javelin deals a smidge more damage than Pseudopod, so a plasmoid explorer always substitutes a Javelin attack for one of the two Pseudopod attacks in its Multiattack. With respect to retreat, a plasmoid explorer takes its cues from its allies, Disengaging and pulling back when seriously wounded (reduced to 6 hp or fewer) but withdrawing sooner if they’re doing so, too.
All plasmoids are Amorphous, allowing them to squeeze through openings the size of a silver piece—but only if they’re not carrying anything. That rules out the plasmoid warrior’s shield and weapons and all the plasmoid explorer’s gear. (The plasmoid boss goes au naturel.) If you’ve got plasmoids undertaking infiltration missions, remember to use only their Pseudopod attacks and to reduce the plasmoid warrior’s Armor Class to 14.
Next: aartuks.
