## Vampirate Tactics


Whoever first coined the portmanteau “vampirate” must have felt very proud, and deservedly so—but it wasn’t Chris Perkins, or whoever else worked with him on Spelljammer. The first “vampirate” I encountered was Jessica Marcrum’s Captain Fulmini from Hit Point Press’s Big Bads series. Before that, British author Justin Somper wrote the six-book Vampirates series of novels for young readers, starting in 2005 with Demons of the Ocean. Somper claims the word just came to him, and I’d be inclined to credit him with its invention … if not for its use in 2004 in the webcomic Charby the Vampirate, in 2003 in Uncle Davver’s Really Scary Movie Show and in what I think may be the decisive winner, James H. Schmitz’s science fiction short story “The Vampirate,” published in Science-Fiction Plus magazine in 1953. (You can read that story, retitled “Blood of Nalakia,” online at http://baencd.freedoors.org/Books/Telzey%20Amberdon/0671578510___7.htm.)
As for Spelljammer’s vampirates, they bear only superficial similarities to the vampire and vampire spawn of the Monster Manual—and more closely resemble those of Buffy the Vampire Slayer, at least with regard to their Explode trait, which causes them to burst into clouds of ash when reduced to 0 hp. They’re not sensitive to sunlight, they don’t drink blood, they’re indifferent to running water, they don’t regenerate, and they can march right into your house whether you’ve invited them in or not.
Their ability contour is one we don’t see too often: one high peak in Constitution, high Dexterity, and everything else either average or only slightly above average. This contour would suggest a skirmisher, except that vampirates have only one out-of-the-ordinary movement ability, Spider Climb. What I’m thinking is that what makes vampirates unique isn’t their behavior in melee but rather their behavior when boarding a ship.

Think about it: As long as they’re in contact with a surface they can put their hands and feet on, the direction of gravity doesn’t matter to them. They can travel perpendicular to the movement of their quarry, approach from below, launch themselves from their own ship to the keel side, and crawl around the hull to the deck. Unless your lookouts are looking down, the first you’ll see of a vampirate boarding crew is when they’re clambering up the side of the ship and over the railings. This maneuver is doubly nasty if the vampirate vessel happens to have more hit points than the one it’s attacking. The moment their air envelopes make contact, the gravity of the target vessel lurches sideways, pulling all hands in the direction that’s “downward” relative to the vampirate vessel. Advantage: vampirates!
Vampirates rely heavily on this unexpected stunt, because their only other particularly interesting feature is their Energy Drain attack. Energy Drain can be used either in melee or at range, which is handy: There’s no penalty for attacking up-close, as there is with most ranged weapons, but it can also be used from up to 30 feet away. Vampirates attack with Energy Drain as soon as they’re within 30 feet of their targets, and while they don’t shy away from melee, they also don’t charge into it until they themselves are seriously wounded (reduced to 16 hp or fewer). When they do, it’s to make sure that their enemy is within range of the ash they explode into when they’re destroyed.
There’s one exception to this rule. Since vampirates are vulnerable to radiant damage, when they see an opponent dealing radiant damage to one of them at a time—say, with sacred flame—they swarm that opponent and try to take them out. On the other hand, when they see an opponent dealing area-effect radiant damage—say, with dawn—they panic and flee. Aside from these reactions to radiant damage, vampirates are indiscriminate in their target selection and attack whoever happens to be closest to them, and they don’t flee.
The vampirate captain is essentially similar to the basic vampirate; its greater Strength and Charisma don’t alter its tactics significantly. The trait that leaps out from its stat block is Ship Invisibility, which cranks up the shock factor of a vampirate boarding attack even further by making the attacking vessel impossible to see coming, no matter which direction it’s coming from.
While basic vampirates carry light crossbows, the vampirate captain carries a heavy crossbow instead. I haven’t discussed the crossbows yet because they’re not really in the vampirate spirit. By the time an opponent knows a vampirate is coming, they’re already within range of Energy Drain. What does a vampirate need a crossbow for? Well, if it decides it needs to flee because of some no-fun cleric summoning great big beams of radiant damage, it can shoot back with its crossbow as its ship speeds away from the scene. Generally, though, it’s the vampirate that wants to get close and the vampirate’s opponent who’d prefer to keep their distance. Crossbows deal about as much damage as Energy Drain, but they don’t turn victims into shadows, and that’s much more fun.
A vampirate captain, unlike a basic vampirate, also has sufficient Wisdom to call off an attack if it turns out to have been an overplay. It stops fighting and parleys when it’s reduced to half its maximum hit points (42 hp or fewer)—yes, I said half. It’s one of those rare cases in which it’s a bit too soon to stand down when the vampirate captain is only moderately wounded, but it’s a bit too long to wait until the captain is seriously wounded. That’s because the undead captain’s greater force of personality isn’t quite enough to overcome its compulsion to attack—but being seriously wounded is still sufficient to prod it to charge into toe-to-toe melee, where it will explode if and when it’s ultimately destroyed. And you can’t have both parley and a headlong charge happening at the same time.
The vampirate mage shares all the melee-favoring traits of the basic vampirate but replaces the crossbow with a ranged spell attack, Ray of Cold. It can make this attack twice in one action, thanks to Multiattack, but it still doesn’t surpass the damage value of Energy Drain, nor can it turn a foe into a shadow.
I think it makes the most sense to treat the vampirate mage the same as most other creatures whose primary offensive ability is a spellcasting ability and whose primary defensive ability is Constitution: as a support spellcaster. It has two spells it can use to perform this function, hypnotic pattern and darkness, and my opinion is that it should cast them in this order. Hypnotic pattern covers a larger area (a cube 30 feet on a side, rather than a sphere 30 feet in diameter) and has the potential to incapacitate opponents, allowing a vampirate raiding party to focus its attacks on fewer foes and mop up the rest when it’s convenient to do so. Darkness is less clearly advantageous, since vampirates can’t see through magical darkness—but neither do they rely on having advantage to land their attacks, nor gain any additional benefit from it. Since their opponents may gain some benefit from it, why not shut it down entirely? (Counterintuitively, because every non-visually-enhanced creature in a darkness spell is effectively both blinded and invisible, it has both advantage and disadvantage on every attack roll—with the result that all sources of advantage and disadvantage on attack rolls are nullified.)
Of course, these decisions depend in large part on the goal of the vampirates’ attack. If all they want to do is slaughter the crew and steal their loot, a vampirate mage can follow the plan described above. However, if the vampirates intend to capture a whole ship, the vampirate mage has a different job to do: taking over the spelljamming helm. That’s where dimension door comes in: The vampirate mage teleports directly to the bridge or helm room and attempts to murder the occupant of the chair. If and when it succeeds, it casts message to alert the vampirate captain, or whoever else is leading the raid, who then commands the raiders to shift positions to defend the mage’s occupation of the helm.
The vampirate mage has the same approach to parley as the vampirate captain, willing to break off attack to talk terms when reduced to half its maximum hit points (34 hp or fewer) but charging when seriously wounded (reduced to 27 hp or fewer). However, it won’t parley unless it’s in a one-on-one battle against the occupant of the spelljamming helm. If at any point it’s outnumbered, it attempts to re-join its allies, and when it’s part of the larger raid, it lets its captain do all the talking.
Next: neogi hatchling swarms, pirates and void hunters.
