## Tactical Considerations in Spelljammer


So … Spelljammer. That’s what readers asked for. I know a lot of Dungeons & Dragon players were looking forward to this adventure-sourcebook set with eager anticipation for a long time—“Spelljammer confirmed!” was a running gag for years, even preceding the release of the game’s fifth edition. Me, though … I’m not influenced by nostalgia for any D&D content published since 1989. It wasn’t part of my experience. I bought the beautiful, shiny alternate-cover box set from my friendly local game store (shout-out to Chicagoland Games!)—and then the hadozee controversy dropped, and that severely dampened my interest in even opening up the books and seeing what was in them. I mean, come on, how enlightened do you have to be to recognize that “monkey people” is a concept that’s going to require some extra-special attention from the get-go to make sure it’s not embarrassingly mishandled? And yet.
Anyway, because of that, except to rearrange my desk, I hadn’t touched the books again until this week. Credit where it’s due: Whatever blunders may have occurred in the editorial process, the production values on this set are second to none. The art, both cover and interior, is amazing. The use of foil on the cover is next-level. The printing pops. The paper is thick and smooth, chosen to stand up to heavy thumbing-through (and/or to thicken the books’ fairly scant page count—I’m willing to extend the benefit of the doubt and assume the former motivation as well as the latter). They even smell nice.
One thing I quickly realized after paging through Boo’s Astral Menagerie, however, is that some of the quirks of adventuring in “space”—particularly how gravity and atmosphere are handled—are going to have an impact on how all the creatures in Boo’s behave in combat. And that information isn’t in Boo’s; it’s in the Astral Adventurer’s Guide, another book in the Spelljammer set. So here’s a quick overview of these quirks, along with the implications of them that jump out at me. If you think I’ve missed anything, please share your observations in the comments, so that I can incorporate that knowledge into my analyses going forward.

“Space,” in Spelljammer, consists of outer space and even more outer space. Outer space is Wildspace, a collection of material reality bubbles around star systems. Beyond and between these bubbles is the Astral Sea, the even more outer space in which they drift. Counterintuitively, there’s no air in Wildspace (except where there is), but the Astral Sea is full of it (or at least seems to be).
Planets and moons in Wildspace may be surrounded by atmospheres, and creatures and objects that leave these atmospheres break off pieces of them and carry them around. These pieces are called “air envelopes,” and those of living creatures are treated as cubes, while those of objects conform to the objects’ shape and extend as far outward as the objects are long, wide and high. An individual creature’s envelope contains 1 minute’s worth of breathable air, which can only be replenished by entering a larger envelope. So if you’re knocked outside your ship’s air envelope, you have 10 rounds to get back in. (Which is a real problem if your ship is in motion, as will become apparent.)
Planetary and lunar air envelopes—i.e., atmospheres—self-replenish, but ships’ air envelopes don’t. Their envelopes contain approximately 120 days’ worth of fresh air for everyone on board, so you don’t want to spend longer than that traveling from one planet or moon to another. You can survive a longer trip, but bad things will happen. That’s because air can be fresh (fully breathable), foul (“stale and partially depleted,” imposing the poisoned condition on anyone who breathes it) or deadly (unbreathable, initiating suffocation immediately). Once a ship runs out of fresh air, that air becomes foul, making every task you undertake harder. Once it runs out of foul air, it becomes deadly, which is actually worse than having no air at all.
When two air envelopes overlap, they both take on the quality of the larger envelope. Thus, a fresh ship’s envelope can refresh a foul individual envelope, but the inverse is also true: A foul ship’s envelope can befoul a fresh individual envelope. If you have fresh air in your envelope, therefore, you mustn’t let it come into contact with a larger envelope containing foul or deadly air.
Many astral creatures can live without air; others can generate their own envelopes of fresh air. A creature that needs air and doesn’t generate its own must dwell within the envelope of a planet, a moon or a creature that does generate its own.
Although magical fire burns in the vacuum of Wildspace, nonmagical fire doesn’t—so you might think that if you’re floating alongside a ship, your air envelope separate from its air envelope, and you try to lob a Molotov cocktail at it, the vacuum between you will extinguish it as soon as it leaves your envelope, and it will smash harmlessly against the hull. Remember, however, that objects carry their own air envelopes, and that includes the firebomb you’ve just thrown! So as long as it crosses the space in between within, say, a round or two, it should have just enough air in its own envelope, borrowed from yours, to keep burning until the moment of impact. Don’t try to pull the stunt from a quarter-mile away, though: in that instance, it will go out.
Planets and moons have radially symmetrical gravity, but ships and smaller objects have gravity planes, with two opposite “up” directions, one on each side. If the plane intersects a spelljamming ship in the middle, the lower, “ventral” decks are upside-down from the point of view of the upper, “dorsal” decks, and vice versa—which matters a lot when you’re trying to land. The ship diagrams in the AAG conveniently specify which decks have inverted gravity.
When two gravity planes intersect, you fall toward whatever gravity-generating body you’re closer to, in the direction implied by that object’s gravity plane. However, when the two bodies make physical contact, the one with more hit points “wins,” imposing its own definition of gravity on both bodies. This interaction implies that ramming weaker ships from weird directions is a potent astro-naval combat tactic, potentially causing enemy deckhands to tumble overboard (although it also complicates boarding).
The bidirectional nature of the gravity plane means you can clamber across the bottom of a spelljamming ship’s hull as if the ship were upside-down—but objects and creatures not in contact with a ship’s surface must find some way to propel themselves back toward it, or they can eventually drift out of its air envelope and get left behind. That’s bad enough when a ship is moving at normal flying speed, as when approaching an obstacle such as an asteroid or another ship; when cruising through Wildspace, at a speed of 100 million miles per day, it’s a death sentence.
Objects falling in a vertical direction, relative to a ship’s gravity plane, will oscillate back and forth through it indefinitely. However, if you can knock a creature back in a direction parallel to the gravity plane, its inertia will carry it out of the gravity envelope unless it can grab onto or push back against something. The AAG seems to follow my rule that real science holds firm anytime it’s not superseded by fantasy science: If something propels you, or if you push off from something more massive, you just keep going until another force is applied.
Like Wildspace, the Astral Sea has no specific gravity. Unlike in Wildspace, there’s no need to breathe in the Astral Sea; anyone in it can survive as if they were breathing fresh air. There’s no need to eat or drink, either, and space is not fatally frigid but rather pleasantly temperate. You can live forever, sustained by thought alone—unless a native denizen makes a meal of you. However, the lack of gravity—if you’re not within the area of influence of a gravity plane—messes with melee attacks. If you’re wielding a thrusting weapon, or if you have a flying or swimming speed, you’re all right. Otherwise, you have disadvantage on your melee attack rolls, because trying to swing a weapon in zero-g is just too hard to get the hang of.
Finally, a vessel can be propelled through Wildspace and the Astral Sea only through the use of a spelljamming helm, a magic item to which the ship’s helmsman must attune. The helmsman must also be a spellcaster. It goes without saying that control of the helm is a paramount strategic consideration—especially if a ship has more than one helm that can be used to control it, although none of the ships described in the AAG has more than one. (In fact, it’s not always specified where that one spelljamming helm is. I assume it’s on the bridge unless the map key says otherwise.) A spelljammer controlling a ship from the helm can maneuver at will, without spending any of their own action economy, but they can’t leave the helm or cast any spell that requires their concentration without abandoning control of the ship. These restrictions make them vulnerable—and a prime target of attack. The No. 1 objective of any attempt to board and seize a spelljamming ship is to take and hold the helm. Both attacker and defender must plan accordingly.
ETA (6/5/23): As I reread the paragraph on spelljammer duels, it dawns on me that a boarding party intent on capturing an enemy ship might not necessarily attempt a physical takeover of its helm but rather bring a helm of their own on board with them, seek out an unobtrusive hiding place and try to execute the takeover from there, hacker-style. I don’t see anything in the AAG that explicitly forbids this strategy.
ETA (6/12/23): There’s an unresolved contradiction in “Traversing the Astral Sea” (AAG, chapter 2): On the one hand, the subsection “Travel by Thought Alone” states, “A creature doesn’t need a vessel to travel through the Astral Sea. In this realm, a traveler has the option of propelling itself by thought alone. … A creature that chooses to move in this fashion can move in any direction at a flying speed in feet equal to 5 × its Intelligence Score.” In other words, every creature has de facto flying movement, all the time. If you tink it, you can draem it! However, the paragraph above that one states, “The Astral Sea has gravity.” And the section titled “Gravity Planes,” a couple of pages earlier, includes rules for drifting and falling that make this explicit statement: “A floating creature that enters the air envelope of a larger body is immediately affected by the larger body’s gravity … . The creature falls from where it entered the air envelope to the surface of that body, or to the gravity plane of that body, whichever is nearer.” Is this a specific rule that beats the general rule of flight-by-thought in the Astral Sea, or is it simply an overlapping fact that implies that you fall if and only if you’re not thinking about flying? Personally, I think I’d treat it as the former, but I’d like to know what the designers intended.
Chapter 2 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide also includes a rule for astral travel by thought, but it’s a “walking” speed of 3 × Intelligence, whereas the AAG explicitly stipulates a flying speed of 5 × Intelligence. I know which one I’d choose.
Next: astral elves.
