## Rilmani Tactics


A standoffish species with metallic bodies, rilmani are the embodiment of neutrality, making sure the cosmos never gets too cruel, too kind, too disorderly or too orderly. They show up when the forces of one alignment or another seem to be getting too much of an upper hand. Originally, in second edition Planescape, there were six varieties, but in fifth edition Planescape, they’ve been pared back to three.
Ferrumach rilmani, which (as you can guess from the name) have an ironlike appearance, are brute melee warriors. They’re also the weakest of the 5E rilmani, but at CR 9, that’s like saying they’re the poorest millionaires; only high-level adventurers are likely to encounter more than one of them at a time.
What makes this brute any different from the innumerable other brutes in 5E Dungeons & Dragons? Well, to begin with, there’s its Skewering Charge. Like many such features, it requires the ferrumach to move at least 20 feet in a straight line toward its target. Unlike many such features, it doesn’t require an attack roll to take effect: If the target fails its Strength saving throw to avoid being grappled, it also takes automatic piercing damage. In addition, any creature that starts its turn grappled by a ferrumach takes additional automatic slashing damage, and Skewering Charge is the vehicle by which ferrumachs grapple.
These sources of damage are a large part of the ferrumach’s damage-dealing capacity, and they’re dramatic and memorable as well, so they’re an indispensable part of ferrumachs’ attack routine. On top of that, though, a ferrumach has to be fairly sure that Skewering Charge is going to work. If the target shrugs off the save, the ferrumach becomes a yawner of a skybot hacking away with a Sharpened Limb and shooting magically fabricated metal slivers at opponents it can’t reach. So its first priority is to identify a target with a Strength save modifier of +1 or lower.

Ferrumachs’ Intelligence is high enough for them to accurately assess enemies’ weaknesses, but it’s not high enough for them to know whether a target has a Strength save modifier of +1 or lower, so they have to go by what they know: Other brute creatures are poor targets, as are front-line humanoid warriors, monks and rangers. Finesse fighters and skirmishing rogues, on the other hand, make ideal targets for Skewering Charge, because not only do they tend to deemphasize Strength, they also don’t hide in the back. Ferrumachs favor these targets when they’re present, particularly during their initial attacks.
What if the opposition consists of nothing but brutes, or the only low-Strength targets a ferrumach can identify are on the back line, out of reach? The ferrumach has a solution to that, although it’s weirdly arbitrary: a once-per-day casting of ice storm, placed where it will affect at least four opponents (or all of them, if there are only three; it’s not worth casting against two). Ice storm turns the ground beneath it into difficult terrain until the end of the caster’s next turn, so the ferrumach spends its next turn shooting bolts into the area of effect rather than try to charge into melee immediately.
Once per day, a ferrumach can cast dispel magic, but in the post–Monsters of the Multiverse regime, it has no way to boost it above 3rd level. Consequently, the number of spells worth giving up three attacks to dispel is fairly short: haste, slow, protection from evil and good, maybe bestow curse or call lightning. Other spells, it can simply power through—perhaps by “casting” some Bolts against the caster to break their concentration.
Although they have the Wisdom to avoid fights they can’t win, rilmani don’t seem like particularly compromising sorts to me. When they decide to fight, they fight to the death.
Cuprilach rilmani, the coppery variety, are assassins, their extraordinary Dexterity being the standout score in their ability contour. They’re proficient in Perception and expert in Stealth, the hallmark combination of the ambush attacker. A particularly interesting aspect of their stat block is the ability to cast disguise self at will, permitting them to blend into crowds and maneuver up next to their intended victims. It also lets them escape from their crime scenes by fleeing into crowds, then changing their appearance to make themselves hard to pick out. (We’ll charitably assume that disguise self’s prohibition against changing “body type” doesn’t require cuprilachs to disguise themselves as humanoids with floating torsos detached from their pelvises and legs.) When they need the change to stand up to physical inspection, they can cast alter self once per day.
They lack Sneak Attack or a comparable ability to boost the damage of their initial strikes, but it’s not as much of a liability as it may seem. Instead of having to count on landing one whopper of a hit, they make three attacks per turn (four if they choose to use their Assassin’s Agility bonus action to make another, but I’ll get to that in a second) each of which compounds its weapon’s physical damage with 2d12 psychic damage. If all three hits land, that’s approximately equivalent to dealing 11d6 Sneak Attack damage, which is more than a level 20 rogue gets to deal. It also means all their damage eggs aren’t in one single damage basket.
Disguising itself and sidling up to its victims is by far the most effective way for a cuprilach to execute an assassination scheme. Hiding at a distance, making itself completely inaudible with silence and flinging the first Bolt with advantage is a conceptually sound plan undermined by the short range of the Bolt attack. We’re not talking about crossbow-launched bolts here; take away the psychic damage, and Bolt is essentially just throwing a dagger, complete with 20/60-foot range. To gain advantage on a ranged attack from hiding, a cuprilach can be no more than 20 feet away from its target. From 25 to 60 feet away, all it gets from unseen attacker advantage is a negation of disadvantage from attacking at long range. Beyond 60 feet, Bolt is useless.
While truesight allows a cuprilach’s vision to penetrate magical darkness, it doesn’t do a thing against its own fog cloud. But there’s a surprising trick hidden in the fog: When vision is heavily obscured, everyone is effectively blinded and invisible, giving their attack rolls both advantage and disadvantage, and therefore neither. As a side effect, all sources of advantage or disadvantage on attack rolls are negated … which means that a cuprilach hiding 25 to 60 feet away can fling a Bolt without being penalized! Moreover, it means that their extra psychic damage gets delivered, while player character rogues have to suffer the indignity of having their Sneak Attacks shut down because they can’t gain advantage. This exploitation of fog cloud is super-situational, though—not least because the appearance of the fog will immediately raise the suspicions of the target and their allies. A point-blank melee attack delivered from alongside the victim is almost always the better bet.
On its first round of attacks, a cuprilach may well want to use Assassin’s Agility to deliver a fourth attack, especially if the first three aren’t enough to finish the victim off. (Assassins come to assassinate, so if its target is the kind that gets to make death saves, a cuprilach keeps attacking until they’re all used up.) On its second combat turn, however, the cuprilach is already contemplating its departure. After making whatever attacks it feels it needs to make, it uses Assassin’s Agility to either Dash (if it’s not within melee reach of any opponent) or Disengage (if it is) and flees the scene, flinging Bolts behind it at anyone in pursuit. As it flees, it uses Assassin’s Agility to Dash, so that it can keep running full tilt even as it uses its action to cast fog cloud to hide its movement or disguise self to confound its pursuers. (Once disguised, of course, it slows to a walk.)
Regardless of how much damage it takes, a cuprilach doesn’t flee before its work is done—but as long as its work doesn’t entail killing its target’s allies, it doesn’t stick around to do so for the fun of it. It kills whom it must, and then it leaves.
Aurumach rilmani possess extraordinary Strength, but also extraordinary Intelligence and Dexterity—and these are even higher. They therefore flex among the roles of long-distance spellcaster, ranged sniper and close-in shock attacker. They’re resistant to physical damage from nonmagical weapons and to psychic damage, but by the time a party of PCs encounters one of them, they’re not likely to be wielding nonmagical weapons anymore. A PC who does wield a nonmagical weapon and doesn’t cast spells is deprioritized as a target; others pose greater threats.
Because they’re so flexible, aurumachs can identify their targets’ preferences vis-à-vis melee or ranged combat, then do the opposite. An aurumach flies over the heads of the front line, hovers next to a back-line spellcaster or marksman, and does its level best to ruin their day. If melee attackers run back to try to intervene, it slaps a slow spell on them. Depending on whether it deems the ranged or melee attacker(s) to be the greater threat, it might decide to shoot Gleaming Rays at the incoming sword-swingers rather than hack away at the opponents beside it with Manifested Blade. Then again, its Multiattack lets it make three attacks of its choice. It can mix it up if it likes.
Invoke Weakness is a powerful ability for use against whomever the aurumach deems most in need of prompt elimination, and because it’s a bonus action, it can be used at the start of the aurumach’s turn and followed up with an attack on that same turn. The only catch is that the aurumach knows it’s going to have less than a two-thirds chance of succeeding against an opponent with a Wisdom save modifier of +5 or greater—and because it has Intelligence 21, it knows who those opponents are. Thus, each turn when Invoke Weakness is available, the aurumach needs to decide whether a foe with a high Wisdom save is really the most important target to take out. If so, the closer their Wisdom save modifier is to +5, the more likely it goes ahead and takes the chance. Otherwise, it settles for second-best.
However, even though Invoke Weakness is on a 5–6 recharge—usually code for “This ability rocks, so use it whenever you can!”—the more powerful bonus action is Aura of Blades, because once it’s turned on, it stays on for 1 minute or unless and until the aurumach is incapacitated, no concentration required. Thus, there’s little reason for the aurumach not to activate Aura of Blades on its first turn, so that it can get use out of it during every round of combat. As an added bonus, it might make charging melee attackers balk at getting too close.
The only reason I think I might suggest opting for Invoke Weakness over Aura of Blades in round 1 is if the aurumach can get within 10 feet of only one back-liner with its first turn’s movement. Taking our cue from the Targets in Areas of Effect table in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide, we can read Aura of Blades’ 10-foot radius as an indication that it’s meant for use against two or more opponents at once. If that’s not possible, the aurumach may as well get its 27 average damage out of Invoke Weakness rather than settle for just 16 damage against a single defender with Aura of Blades.
There’s one other interesting detail in the aurumach stat block, and that’s the fact that they can cast geas as a single action, which implies a potential combat application. What can we do with that? “Come no closer” is, frankly, dull. So is pretty much any variation on hurt-them-and-not-me that I can think of. Let’s think outside the box, then. What if the aurumach’s whole plan is a Sun Zi–esque “win without fighting” maneuver? What if it’s not looking for a fight at all, but a champion? What if it shows up on the scene and, before anyone really knows what’s going on, puts the whammy on Dasha and commands her to go fight the forces of Arcadia, which is getting too big for its planar britches? The shock of that turn of events might be what causes combat to break out in the first place.
Like ferrumachs, aurumachs don’t come to play, and no amount of damage will induce them to withdraw.
Next: mo’ modrons.
