## Hoplite Tactics


Hoplites in Mythic Odysseys of Theros are melee warriors who come in three flavors: Akroan, Meletian and Setessan, named after the Theran analogues of Sparta, Athens and Themiscyra (the last as portrayed in myth—and comics). Meletian and Akroan hoplites are equal in challenge rating, while Setessan hoplites are slightly stronger; take that, Akros.
All hoplites have a few traits in common: good armor; better Dexterity than Constitution, for a shock attacker contour; proficiency in Dexterity saving throws; and a solid melee attack. Although just one hoplite is a dangerous opponent for a whole party of low-level adventurers, they’re clearly designed with the intent of sending them out in squads, if not by tens or hundreds, and are therefore more properly wielded against mid- and high-level parties, especially if they’re followers of an even more powerful leader.

Shock attackers are normally mobile and hard-hitting, but Akroan hoplites are more like a relentlessly advancing wave. They have proficiency in Strength saving throws, resisting efforts to disrupt their formation, and they have the Hold the Line trait, which is akin to the Sentinel feat, punishing foes for moving around within reach of their spears. If Akroan hoplites maintain a tight front-line formation, with no empty spaces between them, approaching any hoplite not on one end or the other of the formation provokes three opportunity attacks—one from the target, plus one from each of its neighbors.
Akroan hoplites’ Multiattack comprises either three melee attacks or two ranged attacks. Their only ranged attack is to throw spears, but they have two choices of melee attack: a spear thrust or a shield bash. My inclination is to read these choices as two spear attacks, preceded by Shield Bash if the attacks are made in melee. That’s because Shield Bash can knock foes prone on a hit, setting the hoplite up with advantage on follow-up attacks on its turn. I also like the mental image of an opponent’s getting knocked down by the hoplite’s shield, then stabbed twice with their spear, then taking a punishing opportunity attack when they try to get up and scramble away. Akroan hoplites carry shields, so their Spear attacks always deal one-handed damage.
Per the 2014 Monster Manual (the only one we’ve gotten to see yet), creatures with throwing weapons carry 2d4 of them. Per history, however, a soldier in Classical times might have carried three to five lightweight javelins onto a battlefield but generally brought only one spear, because those spears were big, unwieldy things, up to 8 feet long. The Akroan hoplite stat block makes no mention of javelins (or, for that matter, shortswords, which were a standard part of the hoplite armament package), so there are a couple of ways we can go here: We can hew closer to reality and have the hoplite carry just the one spear, making no use of it until they close to melee distance and spending their action to Dash toward the enemy rather than attack; or we can go handwavey and give them three or five spears, throwing two at a time while they advance toward foes they can’t simply stab yet. Either way, however, once engaged in melee, the hoplite uses its Multiattack action to make a Shield Bash attack, then to follow up with two Spear attacks.
If we read Akroans as Spartans, it’s clear that these guys are undeterred by wounds, however severe, and fight to the death. However, they do possess the Wisdom not to initiate a battle against foolish odds if they have any way to improve those odds. Therefore, most (though not all) encounters with Akroan hoplites will be of Deadly difficulty (by 2014 encounter building guidelines) or High Difficulty (by 2024 guidelines).
Meletian hoplites are hard to fool, with proficiency in Intelligence saves and the Perception skill, while the magic they bring to bear permits them to carry out various devious stunts of their own. Ignoring their magical ability for the moment, they have the same weapon attack options as Akroan hoplites, the one difference being that they can throw three spears at once rather than just two. (Thus, if you’re taking the handwavey approach, you want to give them four spears each: three for throwing, one for stabbing.) Shield Bash is always a prelude to two follow-up Spear attacks, and these melee attacks are preferred over attacking at range.
Ray of frost can be substituted for one weapon attack, but it deals less damage than a thrown spear. Its rider effect of reducing the target’s speed by 10 feet is only situationally useful—best, perhaps, against flying enemies. However, it does have the virtue of being unaffected by distance: If the target is 60 feet away or closer, it doesn’t matter if they’re more than 20 feet away, whereas a thrown spear has disadvantage against a target at long range. (My printing of Theros erroneously omits the range of a Meletian hoplite’s thrown spear, but it’s right there in the Akroan hoplite stat block on the preceding page.)
How great a difference does range make? A thrown spear deals an average of 6.5 piercing damage on a hit, while ray of frost deals only 4.5 cold damage. However, a straight attack with +5 to hit has a 55 percent chance of success against AC 15, whereas with disadvantage, it has only a 30 percent chance. Fifty-five percent of 4.5 equals 2.475 expected damage, while 30 percent of 6.5 equals only 1.95, so ray of frost is superior to a thrown spear at distances greater than 20 feet against AC 15. The cantrip maintains its superiority—enhances it, in fact—against higher Armor Classes, but against AC 12 or lower, the expected damage of the spear is greater, even with disadvantage.
Meletian hoplites are intelligent enough to be aware of that fact and choose accordingly, and they’re experienced enough to tell an unarmored or lightly armored spellcaster from an unarmored or lightly armored rogue or monk whose Dex is going to push their AC higher. They also know that a weapon hit won’t affect a Raging barbarian the way the cold damage from ray of frost will. They’re clever beans!
Finally, there’s spellcasting. All of a Meletian hoplite’s spells except mage hand have neat tactical applications; the problem with all of them is the opportunity cost, since the hoplite can dish out quite a bit of damage with their spear alone. The best spells in the list, therefore, are those that can be used either for support during combat or for setup beforehand.

Invisibility is a no-brainer: When you want to set up an ambush or a surprise assault and you don’t have proficiency in Stealth, vanish.
Blur is good prophylaxis when you and the enemy both know there’s going to be a rumble and keeping them from hitting you is more important than concealing your presence. While it doesn’t confer advantage on outgoing attacks, the way invisibility does, attacking doesn’t cause it to end; you can stay fuzzy as long as nothing breaks your concentration.
Cloud of daggers has to be weighed against a full turn’s worth of Multiattack. There’s no save against it, so its expected damage is fully equal to its average damage: 10 slashing. The consistency of this spell makes it better against heavily armored opponents who aren’t likely to be knocked down by a Shield Bash, i.e., those with AC 17 or higher, but the sheer damage that spears deal make those attacks better against softer targets, especially those put on the ground. At range, cloud of daggers is handy for a Meletian hoplite who’s already thrown all their spears. But perhaps the most entertaining use—if not the most mathematically optimal—is for every hoplite in the formation to cast cloud of daggers at once, creating not just one space full of whirling, hovering blades but an entire line of them across a space that opponents have to march through if they want to reach their objective. It’s like a bargain-basement blade barrier. Under 2014 rules, this situation is probably the only one in which a hoplite is likely to sustain cloud of daggers for more than one round; any foe who can simply walk out of the cloud is going to do so, and it can’t be moved without casting it again. However, the 2024 Player’s Handbook permits it to be relocated up to 30 feet each round for the cost of an action.
Color spray’s area of effect, a 15-foot cone, calls for it to be used against at least two opponents, whether you’re using the 2014 Dungeon Master’s Guide or the 2024 DMG. However, under 2014 rules, creatures are affected based on their hit points; under 2024 rules, they’re affected if they fail a Constitution save. The 2014 version of the spell blinds opponents with 30 hp or more 29 hp or fewer at least two-thirds of the time, but if we’re looking at mid-to-high-level player characters, you’re not going to find any with that few hit points on the front line unless and until they’re good and cut up. On the other hand, if you’re using the 2024 version of the spell, a DC 13 Con save is going to be fairly easy for most front-liners to beat: all they need is a non-negative Con save modifier to be confident of doing so at least a third of the time, and a +3 or better to do so at least half the time. Just stab ’em.
Expeditious retreat is a bonus action, and therefore a freebie for the Meletian hoplite, which has no other bonus action ability. Useful for withdrawing, of course, but also nifty for charging, as long as the hoplites aren’t concentrating on any other spell.
Sleep, in its 2014 incarnation, has the same drawbacks as color spray, but more so: you can only be reasonably sure of its affecting at least 20 up to 19 hp worth of foes. Under 2024 rules, it’s a bit more effective, but not a lot more. Yes, it targets Wisdom, which front-line opponents are a lot less likely to have proficiency in, instead of Con. But targets have to fail the save twice in order to conk out fully; if you disregard the one round of incapacitation you get from a single failure, that’s equivalent to their having advantage on the roll. And no PC is going to have a Wisdom save mod of −5 or less, which is what it takes for the hoplite to have a two-thirds chance or better that the target is going to fail the save twice. One round of wooziness isn’t worth the opportunity cost. Just stab ’em.
Mage hand has no place here.
Minor illusion can seriously mess with opponents’ minds if you know (and Meletian hoplites do) that something you can hear but not see is a lot more worrying than something you can see but not hear. A whole squad of hoplites can use this cantrip to unnerve the heck out of their opponents by making an assortment of scary sounds out of view.

Meletian hoplites are disciplined but not fanatical. They withdraw when at least half of their number are seriously wounded (reduced to 19 hp or fewer). Those who are less wounded delay pursuit, while those who are more wounded withdraw to safety.
Setessan hoplites make fewer attacks per round, but those attacks deal poison damage on top of their physical damage, and they’re effective at very long range thanks to their longbows. (Were there longbows in ancient Greece? Maybe in mythical Themiscyra there were.) It’s entirely feasible for a squad of Setessan hoplites to pincushion their enemies to death from afar. When said enemies get tired of that, however, Setessan hoplites are also happy to get in close, with Pack Tactics conferring advantage on all their Scimitar attack rolls. They have proficiency in Wisdom saving throws, and when targeted by spells, they coordinate their attacks to take out the caster. At a range of 125 to 150 feet, they can loose arrows with deadly accuracy without worrying about arcane reprisal.
There’s not a lot more to them than that. You wanna hang back, like a coward? They shoot you. You wanna mix it up? No problem, so do they, and they work together better than you do. Like Akroan hoplites, they don’t pick fights they aren’t confident that they’ll win, so Setessan hoplite encounters are going to be Deadly/High Difficulty. Unlike Akroan hoplites, but like Meletian hoplites, they have a healthy sense of self-preservation, retreating when at least half of their number are seriously wounded (reduced to 23 hp or fewer), with less wounded hoplites delaying pursuit while the more wounded ones withdraw.
Next: oracles.
