## Gem Stalker Tactics

Gem stalkers are odd, and that’s not just my bias against gem dragons talking. They’re kind of a jumble, even for unevolved creatures—which they are, being created by gem dragons out of the leftover organic material of liquidated aberrations.
Let’s start with their ability contour: highest in Strength, with high Dexterity, Intelligence and Constitution to go with it. Their Dex is a smidge higher than their Con, although the modifier is the same, so while there’s a slight bias toward shock attacks over brute melee fighting here, they can flex in a pinch. Proficiency in Perception and Stealth indicates a predilection for ambush, harmonious with the shock attacker role, and their climbing ability (climbing speed plus Spider Climb) fits into this schema nicely as well.
But then we get into the strange stuff. Their Multiattack is savage: four Claw attacks, each of which deals an average 10 damage. Melee, yes, please! Shock attacker and brute are both melee-intensive roles. What’s this, though? A bonus action ranged spell attack, Crystal Dart? That’s not useful in melee. If a gem stalker is engaged in close combat with a target, it’s going to have disadvantage on ranged attacks—all ranged attacks, whether against the same target or a different one. This bonus action clashes with the gem stalker’s melee Multiattack, suggesting that it’s always used before the gem stalker closes and engages. (There’s also the fact that Crystal Dart includes one of five different riders, depending on the type of gem dragon that created the gem stalker, but more on that in a moment.)
Then there’s the Protective Link reaction, which functions only if the gem stalker is within 30 feet of a creature it’s guarding. Is a neutral gem dragon likely to be so altruistic as to order a gem stalker to protect the weak and vulnerable wherever it goes? Doubtful. Is a neutral gem dragon likely to order a gem stalker to protect it? Oh, yeah, that’s much more believable. But in that case, the gem stalker must stay within 30 feet of the gem dragon—inconsistent with the flavor text description of the gem stalker as “a cunning predator capable of traversing the Underdark [and] hunting Aberrations” (and I just now noticed the odd stylistic choice in this book to capitalize the names of most creature types, such as Aberration, Humanoid, Undead—but not “dragon”). A gem stalker may also be tasked with “guarding its creator’s lair,” but 30 feet is still a pretty tight radius for the bodyguard of a Huge or Gargantuan creature.
We could posit, I suppose, that a gem dragon might create a bunch of gem stalkers, then send some out to hunt weird beasties while keeping a couple more in the house for protection. These things are CR 5, though; alongside a full-grown dragon, they need to be used sparingly, or encounter difficulty will fly out of control quickly.
Getting back to Crystal Dart, we have five possible riders:

Teleportation after a hit. I like this one, because it lets the gem stalker close to melee distance with its target and begin Multiattacking immediately.
Gaining temporary hit points. Incentivizes the gem stalker to make Crystal Dart attacks even when doing so might not make tactical sense, in order to fish for temp hp.
Imposing a 1d4 penalty on the target’s next attack roll. Provides the same incentive as above, except in this case the benefit is that a creature engaged in melee is worse at fighting back.
Push 10 feet and knock prone. The save DC is low: even a target with merely average Strength will succeed more than one-third of the time, and a physically formidable target is more likely to succeed than to fail. However, since the maximum range of Crystal Dart is 30 feet but the gem stalker’s movement speed is 40 feet, there will never be any difficulty closing the distance for follow-up attacks against the prone target, which I was initially worried about before I noticed the range/speed difference.
Inflict the poisoned condition. Same weak save DC, but the effect is roughly twice as strong as the 1d4 penalty above.

I don’t see a concrete tactical implication in any of these. It’s more a case of “If you’re lucky, you may get a treat.” There’s no reason to vary the basic approach of Crystal Dart, move toward target, Claw, Claw, Claw, Claw—except in the instance of the teleportation rider, in which teleportation can substitute for movement, leaving the possibility of moving again after mauling the target into unconsciousness.
Putting it all together, a gem stalker guarding its creator’s lair sits tight, while a gem stalker on the hunt for aberrations roams the Underdark, in each instance sticking to high walls and ceilings—as first-person shooter games teach us, no one ever looks up—and using Stealth to avoid detection. When it spots a trespasser or an aberration, the gem stalker waits until the foe comes within 30 feet, then attacks, first with Crystal Dart (bonus action), then running up (movement) to Multiattack (action). After that, another round of Multiattack—probably without Crystal Dart, since it’s much less effective in close combat, but then again, what else is there to do with that bonus action? And now the gem stalker has to make a choice: withdraw or keep fighting?
A shock attacker, at this point, would withdraw. A brute would keep fighting as long as it wasn’t wounded seriously enough to be driven off. The gem stalker has a slight bias toward the former, but as a creature created rather than evolved, it doesn’t necessarily have a strong self-preservation instinct. My gut sense of how it decides whether to break off or keep fighting after two rounds of combat is that it takes its cue from the behavior of its target. Does the target withdraw? Great. Mission accomplished. The gem stalker lets it go. Does the target keep fighting? OK, make it wish it hadn’t. In other words, the gem stalker doesn’t retreat, but it may allow its opponent to retreat and not bother to chase it down.
That’s the baseline. However, an individual gem dragon may harbor such a hatred of aberrations that it orders its gem stalkers to give them no quarter. In that case, when an opposing aberration withdraws—and you’d better believe that the gem talker takes its opportunity attack, if its foe provokes one—it goes back to its original order of Crystal Dart, close in, Multiattack, until that abomination is terminated. Then it picks up the corpse and carries it home for its master gem dragon to make another gem stalker out of.
While defending a gem dragon’s lair, gem stalkers pay more mind to positioning, because they’d like to stay within 30 feet of the dragon in order to use their Protective Link reaction. Forgoing an attack isn’t really an option; instead, gem stalkers focus their attacks on enemies that are within 35 feet of the dragon themselves. They’re mostly indiscriminate in their target selection, generally going after whichever enemy is closest to them or to the dragon. However, given a choice among multiple targets within range, gem stalkers created by sapphire and topaz dragons zero in on those who appear to have the lowest Strength and Constitution, respectively. They can’t read numbers off character sheets, but they can make decent estimates. Gem stalkers don’t chase after ranged attackers, not when they can use Protective Link to render them ineffectual.
Next: dracohydras.
