## Leonin Iconoclast Tactics


Leonin iconoclasts are zealots that believe the gods of Theros “are more likely to spread doom than peace and bounty,” and honestly, I can’t really blame them. With exceptional Dexterity at the peak of their ability contour, they’re shock attackers that hit hard, aiming to end fights quickly. As a bonus, they have very high Wisdom and Constitution. Their Wisdom powers a couple of innate spells and adds to their Armor Class thanks to Unarmored Defense, while their Constitution toughens them up, freeing them from the need to retreat after just a couple of rounds of combat. Proficiency in Dexterity and Wisdom saving throws helps them resist much (though not all) of what enemy clerics might throw at them.
They’re proficient in Stealth and Survival, but not in Perception, so they’re not ambush attackers per se, but they are excellent trackers. They also have proficiency in Arcana, Insight and Intimidation, so it seems like a good moment to revisit how to use social skills against player characters when players have control over their player’s responses.
My recommendation, if you’re using 2014 rules, is to lie to your players. That is, lie to them when their PCs would believe the lie, and because their PCs would believe the lie. In other words, when a leonin iconoclast (for example) wins an Charisma (Intimidation) vs. Wisdom (Insight) contest against a PC, tell the player whatever the iconoclast wants the PC to believe, and present it as fact. Don’t tell the player that the PC believes it’s true; tell them it is true. The player will believe it because you, the DM, said so, and they can then have the PC respond or react to that “knowledge” however they see fit. In contrast, if the PC wins the contest, let the player know that the iconoclast is bluffing.
Under 2024 rules, however, the concept of the contest is no more (ETA: at least, not explicitly—but see below), and the question is whether it makes more sense to extrapolate from the Influence action, which is an explicitly one-way action that PCs take against monsters, or from the Hide action, which is the closest neighboring example of one creature’s making an ability check against another making a different ability check, using different skill proficiencies.

The Influence action is tied directly to social interaction, and it immediately dispenses with situations in which the target of the action is willing (“Sure, no problem!”) or unwilling (“Ewww, no”). In between, there’s “hesitant,” a state in which the result of an effort to intimidate is affected in part by the target’s attitude. It stands to reason that preexisting hostility is likely to make someone more defiant, particularly someone with agency and power, like an adventurer—or a hero from myth, which is what Theran adventurers are. But as Dungeon Masters, we aren’t in a position to assign an attitude to PCs; that’s up to their players. And asking players, “Are you friendly, indifferent or hostile toward this iconoclast?” right before it tries to strong-arm them is an invitation to unwelcome metagaming.
Moreover, the Difficulty Class of an Influence check is never any lower than 15; it’s higher only if the target’s Intelligence score is higher. (Why Intelligence and not Wisdom, the ability to which the Insight skill is most often tied? The 2024 Player’s Handbook makes no attempt to explain.) The Iconoclast’s modifier for Charisma (Intimidation) checks is +3, meaning it has to roll at least a 12 on the die to succeed on any attempt to intimidate. That’s only a 45 percent chance under normal circumstances, which falls to 20 percent against a hostile target—equivalent to a −5 penalty, or a net modifier of −2. I don’t know what this presages with respect to monsters’ social skill proficiencies in the upcoming 2025 Monster Manual, but it sure doesn’t bode well for their chances of using those skill proficiencies to influence PCs.
At first blush, using the Hide action as a model seems better: While it also gates success behind a roll of 15 or better on the initial attempt, the Influence action is PC-only, and the PH24 rules glossary explicitly states that Friendly and Hostile attitudes only grant advantage and disadvantage on ability checks to influence another creature. But that’s “influence” with a lowercase i, which means that it’s referring to the general intention, not to the specific in-game action. Thus, alas, those attitudes—and the advantage and disadvantage they confer—still apply. Plus, the Hide model grants the target a roll to see through the attempt at manipulation, so even if a monster succeeds at clearing that first obstacle, it may still fail. Granted, the chances are slim, and under the 5E14 contest rules, beating the monster’s roll with an opposing Wisdom (Insight) check would have prevailed anyway; the chief issue here is that an only moderately above-average initial Charisma check using a social skill would still allow a chance of success, and it no longer does.
The one real, meaningful difference between the Hide model and the Influence model is that the Hide model makes no reference to whether the target of the manipulation attempt is willing, unwilling or hesitant; the monster rolls, and thus has a chance of successfully making its case, no matter what. What a PC does with that is up to the player, as it’s always been. Either way, to me, the 5E24 gating of Influence and other contested actions behind a DC 15 ability check simply throws caltrops in the path of any and all attempts at achieving objectives through social interaction, and it makes it pointless for any monster to use a social skill at all unless it has a modifier of at least +8 (the bonus needed to give it a two-thirds chance of beating DC 15).
Upshot: 5E14 leonin iconoclasts may try to get their way by bullying PCs into complying. 5E24 leonin iconoclasts don’t bother talking; they simply attack.
ETA:



I forgot to look up what the 2024 Dungeon Master’s Guide had to say, and it turns out to be relevant. Under “Calculated DCs” in chapter 2, it says, “Another way to handle similar situations is to have one creature’s ability check set the DC for another creature’s check. That’s how hiding [sic] works, for example: a hiding creature’s total Dexterity (Stealth) check sets the DC for Wisdom (Perception) checks to find the hidden creature.” It’s interesting that hiding is used as the example case without any mention of the DC 15 gate for success, but never mind that; what we have here is an implicit but otherwise clear statement that an opposed ability check is just fine as a way to handle social skill checks by monsters. In fact, it works exactly the same as contests do in 5E14, with one exception: Ties don’t preserve the status quo. Instead, they go to whoever’s reacting to the action in question—in this case, the PC who must either fall for the leonin iconoclast’s attempt at intimidation, or not.
For that matter, you could adopt the method described in the paragraph preceding the one quoted above, and set a calculated DC equal to 8 plus an ability modifier plus a proficiency bonus—in other words, 8 plus a creature’s skill modifier. Now the question is, which creature, and which skill? Does the player roll to see through the leonin iconoclast’s attempt at coercion, or does the leonin iconoclast roll to batter down the PC’s sense of the situation? You could go either way, but each way significantly favors the creature making the roll, whereas the method described above is more equitable. It still favors the PCs, but only when breaking ties.
As far as actual combat goes, leonin iconoclasts have a strong preference for melee attacks over ranged attacks, not because of their ability contour but because their claws deal so much more damage than their darts—three times as much damage per hit. The difference is so great that they never use their Dart attack except against an opponent that they can’t get into melee reach of at all, such as one that’s flying and won’t come down.
Banishment is powerful, but a leonin iconoclast gets only one casting of it per day, and given that it has a challenge rating of 5, only high-level PCs are ever likely to encounter more than one leonin iconoclast at a time. (Mid-level PCs will most often encounter one iconoclast surrounded by a band of leonin tribal warriors.) Therefore, banishment is reserved for a single powerful enemy that’s native to some other plane of existence—so that it’s gone not just temporarily, but permanently—and the iconoclast doesn’t dilly-dally before casting it.
Detect evil and good has one purpose, which is to determine whether casting banishment on an enemy creature will get rid of it temporarily or permanently. Ideally, the iconoclast casts it before combat begins—perhaps from a position of concealment, although 5E24’s gating of the Hide action makes Dexterity (Stealth) checks pointless without a +8 or better modifier, too. If it’s cast out in the open, of course, there’s always a chance that it may be interpreted as a hostile action and thereby cause combat to ensue. Regardless, if combat has already broken out for some other reason, the leonin iconoclast forgoes detect evil and good and falls back on its own intelligence, guided by experience, to decide whether or not casting banishment makes sense. If not, what clearly makes the most sense is melee.
Leonin iconoclasts choose their battles carefully and fight only when they’re sure of victory (i.e., a Deadly-difficulty encounter in 5E14, a High Difficulty encounter in 5E24). They’re intelligent enough to plan and coordinate their attacks, but when it comes to assessing their enemies’ weaknesses, they don’t look beyond appearances.
Though zealous in their purpose, they have the wisdom to live and fight another day when the tide of combat turns against them, calling for retreat when they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 26 hp or fewer) or at least half their side is seriously wounded.
Next: hoplites.
