## Dragon Tactics, Part 6: Lunar and Solar Dragons


If you’ve played around extensively with dragons, not a lot in the lunar dragon or solar dragon stat blocks will come as a surprise. At every life stage, they share the archetypal Strength-and-Constitution-heavy brute ability contour of most chromatic and metallic dragons, along with breath weapons and proficiency in the ambush skills (Perception and Stealth). Young, adult and ancient lunar dragons possess the classic Claw/Claw/Bite Multiattack, while solar dragons, which lack claws, attack in the same manner but with Bite and Tail; adult and ancient lunar and solar dragons have Legendary Resistance, and ancient lunar dragons have opportunistic Tail attacks along with Wing Attacks for when more opponents than they’d prefer are engaging them in melee and they want to bug out.
So let’s focus on what makes them different. Lunar dragons, which typically dwell in burrows on (wait for it) barren moons, aren’t all that different from white dragons; power-wise, they’re on par or very slightly weaker. They lack blindsight, but their darkvision has much greater range: 120 feet for wyrmlings, 240 feet after they hit puberty. This fact suggests that they dig big: When they burrow into a moon, they carve out not only tunnel networks (although those would be great for trespassers to get lost in) but also an enormous central cavern with plenty of room to maneuver in and no illumination whatsoever. Their Cold Breath deals less damage than a white dragon’s, but it also immobilizes targets that fail their saving throws. Those targets aren’t restrained or paralyzed, so freezing them doesn’t grant the dragon advantage on its follow-up attack rolls, but it does prevent them from pursuing (if they’re trying to engage in melee with the dragon) or from escaping (if they’re trying to avoid engagement).

What they lack in hit points (and they don’t lack a whole lot—they’re merely less hardy than their chromatic cousins), they make up for with the bonus action Phase. Phasing grants lunar dragons resistance to physical damage—all physical damage. The usual “from nonmagical weapons” clause is absent, so your fighter’s +1 longsword and your monk’s Ki-Empowered Strikes won’t bypass this resistance. It requires concentration, but lunar dragons, as written, aren’t spellcasters; there’s nothing else for them to use their concentration for. Their concentration can be broken in the usual way, by dealing them enough damage that they fail a Constitution save against a DC equal to half the damage or 10, whichever is greater. They have proficiency in Con saves, though, so knocking them out of Phase won’t be easy; adult and ancient lunar dragons don’t even bother to use their Legendary Resistance if they fail. They get to use this power three times per day, so if their opponents do somehow manage to disrupt their concentration, they Phase again immediately the next chance they get. (Wyrmling and young lunar dragons get to use it twice per day and do exactly the same thing.)
The legendary action Treacherous Ice is a weird one. A lunar dragon confronted in its lair—or anywhere, really—spends most of its time flying around. If it can Bite and Claw its opponents from beyond their reach, it does, so as not to incur opportunity attacks. What does the condition of the ground matter to those who are trying to fight it? Spellslingers and marksmen will strike from a distance, while melee combatants will have to get airborne somehow in order to engage it (not a difficult thing in Wildspace, which is technically Astral Space, and which characters can therefore “walk” through at a speed of 3 × their Intelligence). Nah, you know what this legendary action is for? It’s for when a lunar dragon attacks your ship. While you’re stuck in “normal” gravity (inasmuch as gravity planes are “normal”) and thinking in two dimensions, Treacherous Ice makes it a pain for you to get around on deck, so that it takes you twice as long to reach the ballista.
Speaking of a lunar dragon’s lair, these astral dragons have another thing in common with one another: They don’t require air to breathe. The moon where a lunar dragon dwells may therefore be airless—or, if you want to play dirty, it may have air, but that air may be foul or even deadly. Thus, when you sail your spelljamming ship into a moon’s atmosphere in pursuit of a lunar dragon, the nice, fresh air you’ve been enjoying on your voyage so far is immediately befouled, and there’s not a lot you can do about it until you reach a world where you can freshen it up again. Although lunar dragons have lairs, they don’t have lair actions; their lairs do, however, have regional effects.
What size moon are we talking about, anyway, when we think of where a lunar dragon makes its lair? Well, for starters, dragons are territorial, so there’s not going to be more than one dragon per satellite. Let’s say, just for fun, that ancient dragons make their lairs on moons greater than 500 miles across, including those the size of our own moon (a little over 2,000 mi in diameter) and up to as large as Ganymede (about 3,200 mi in diameter); adult lunar dragons occupy moons from 250 to 500 miles across, like Enceladus and Miranda; young lunar dragons live on almost-but-not-quite-round moons and asteroids from 125 to 250 miles across, like Mimas, Hyperion and Juno; and lunar dragon wyrmlings inhabit irregular moons and asteroids less than 125 miles across, like Phobos, Metis and Eros. Their off-white to dark gray coloration allows them to blend in with those bodies’ dusty, rocky surfaces well enough to hide by simply lying still, though not to gain advantage on their Stealth checks in the process.
Lunar dragon wyrmlings aren’t bright enough to act on anything other than instinct; they have normal survival instincts, fleeing when seriously wounded (reduced to 14 hp or fewer), but pick their targets indiscriminately, usually attacking whoever’s closest. They probably don’t venture far from their asteroid home and won’t attack a ship unless it strays too close or they’re starving. Young lunar dragons are unsophisticated and lacking in strategy, but they can execute a decent ambush and recognize when it’s gone awry. They flee when reduced to 49 hp or fewer. Adult lunar dragons are more careful in choosing their targets, seeking to pick off the young, the old, the weak, the isolated and the oblivious, as well as anyone carelessly flashing their treasure around. Rather than roam Wildspace looking for prey, however, they usually prefer to lie in wait on the surface of a moon or asteroid and wait for ships to approach within striking distance. They’ll parley if pushed, but they don’t have a lot to say, and they speak only Draconic. They withdraw when reduced to 68 hp or fewer. Ancient lunar dragons are willing to prey on ships directly for their precious cargo and their spelljammer helms, and they choose their battles carefully, roaming Wildspace in search of juicy targets. They’ll also hide against the surface of a moon or asteroid to conceal themselves, waiting for their prey to cruise by, and tail their targets through Wildspace, their slate-gray bodies nearly invisible against its blackness unless looked at directly. They prepare the ground with their Treacherous Ice legendary action when within 120 feet of a good center point for the effect, with the aim of tripping up at least eight opponents or all of them, whichever is less. They follow this tactic up with their Cold Breath, then Phase and dive in to slash and chomp. They’re willing to parley when moderately wounded (reduced to 207 hp or fewer), although they, too, speak only Draconic, and give up when seriously wounded (reduced to 118 hp or fewer).
Solar dragons aren’t much stronger than lunar dragons, and they’re a lot sillier. According to the flavor text, they’re born inside stars and make their lairs inside them as well. Yep, no worrying about getting blasted to ions by a miasma of incandescent plasma. Bizarrely, despite their being immune to radiant damage, regular fire hurts them just fine. Like lunar dragons, they have lairs with regional effects but lack lair actions. These regional effects include Blinding Radiance, which blinds creatures that approach within 10 miles of a star—just 10 miles?!—and Stellar Incineration, which deals 24d10 radiant damage per round to anyone foolish enough to dive into it. That’s appropriate, although I do think the boundary ought to be gradual rather than abrupt.
Solar dragons are extremely fast fliers, and they have the Flyby trait, exempting them from opportunity attacks when they leave an enemy’s reach, so they have no need of the standard-issue draconic Wing Attack. Their breath weapon is essentially a supercharged fireball that deals radiant rather than fire damage, in a radius that starts at 10 feet when a solar dragon is a wyrmling and reaches 40 feet by the time the dragon turns 800 years old.
The flavor text asserts that solar dragons prefer live prey over hunting ships, craving food over treasure, which does make sense. However, the Siege Monster trait makes adult and ancient solar dragons very effective against ships, and since these are the life stages at which dragons’ lairs start to become interesting, it also stands to reason that they’re when a solar dragon might start to look for trinkets and baubles to line its not-at-all-destructive-to-every-form-of-solid-matter crash pad with. Their Nebulous Thoughts trait seems primarily intended to keep Wildspace voyagers from using detect thoughts or similar magic to provide warning that they’re being pursued. Although the illustration makes it clear that a solar dragon isn’t going to camouflage itself against any celestial bodies, plain darkness conceals it just fine—it doesn’t glow or anything—and its darkvision almost certainly reaches farther than any its prey might possess. The fact that an adult or ancient solar dragon’s darkvision range is exactly double its flying speed is convenient indeed: It can lead with its Photonic Breath, which has an equally bonkers range, then Dash into its enemies’ midst on its next turn and let loose its Blinding Brilliance at the end of the next turn in the initiative order. (Unlike Treacherous Ice, Blinding Brilliance does confer advantage on attack rolls against affected creatures.) I have to give credit where it’s due: Whoever wrote these clearly put some thought into them. Solar dragons are silly, but they work.
The slick thing about Photonic Breath is that it doesn’t require any special positioning to make it effective. It emanates not from the solar dragon itself but from a point within range that the solar dragon can see, giving it much greater targeting flexibility than draconic breath weapons usually offer. A solar dragon wyrmling aims its nukeball where it can get at least two enemies in the area of effect, a young solar dragon aims for four or more, an adult solar dragon aims for six or more (or all of its opponents, whichever is less), and an ancient solar dragon tries to get eight or more (ditto). Like any other breath weapon, a solar dragon uses it whenever it’s available.
Solar dragons favor melee over ranged attacks, but they’re mobile fighters, staying out of their opponents’ reach between turns simply because they can. They all have Flyby, and all but the wyrmling have at least 10 feet of reach on their melee attacks anyway, so when Photonic Breath is on cooldown, they close in, Multiattack from their Bite distance (which is always shorter than or equal to the reach of Tail), then pull back to a safe distance off the ground, half their flying speed away.
Solar dragons are cleverer than lunar dragons. Even a solar dragon wyrmling has a basic understanding of whether its modus operandi is working as it ought to or not, aims its breath weapon and melee attacks where they’re most effective, and withdraws when it recognizes that things aren’t going well for it, usually when it’s just moderately wounded (reduced to 35 hp or fewer). Young solar dragons are even better at gauging when they should and should not pick on a particular group of opponents, and they also retreat when moderately wounded (reduced to 102 124 hp or fewer). Adult solar dragons are able to pick out their enemies’ weaknesses after a bit of observation; if they’ve decided a battle is worth initiating, they’ll strike hard at those weaknesses in the hope of gaining a blitzkrieg victory. Should that not go as planned, they’ll retreat when moderately wounded (reduced to 140 hp or fewer) if their efforts aren’t making a dent but stick around until seriously wounded (reduced to 80 hp or fewer) if the situation offers some hope of success. Ancient solar dragons are the same, with moderate and serious wound thresholds of 233 297 hp and 133 170 hp. [N.B. In errata, the hit point maximums of young and ancient solar dragons were changed from 147 (14d10 + 70) to 178 (17d10 + 85) and from 333 (18d20 + 144) to 425  (23d20 + 184).]
Next: mercane.
