## Psurlon Tactics


Time to wrap up Spelljammer and 2023 together with the last of the Dark Sun–connected beasties in Boo’s Astral Menagerie, the psurlons—hyperintelligent, 7-foot things that look like worms with legs, or perhaps overgrown insect larvae.
The standard psurlon has a curious ability contour: a single peak in Intelligence, with its three physical ability scores all equal. Avoid attacks or absorb them—it matters not. But for its own attacks, it decidedly prefers to use its psionic ability rather than brute force, and since its Psychic Crush has a 120-foot range, there’s no particular need for it to get up close and personal.
Before I go on, however, I want to address the combination of the psurlon’s very high Intelligence and its merely humanoid-average Wisdom. Its Intelligence indicates an ability to plan, multiple tactics in its arsenal, an awareness of what works best in which situations, and a keen ability to assess enemies’ weaknesses. Its Wisdom, however, indicates a lack of care in choosing targets and not so much sense when it comes to knowing when to quit, or even to avoid getting into a scrap in the first place. If we presume that alignment still means something, the fact that psurlons are (typically) lawful evil might be interpreted as signifying a measure of arrogance, a sense of entitlement to abuse others as they see fit—and surprise and outrage when the lesser beings dare to strike back.

I wanted to get that out of the way mainly for one reason: A successful Psychic Crush deals approximately the same amount of damage as one Bite and two Claw hits, it’s more in line with the psurlon’s style, and it deals damage even when the target succeeds on its saving throw—but its save DC isn’t very high. Because of that, it needs to be able to recognize, to some degree, what kinds of opponents it shouldn’t try that trick on. A defender has to make a Wisdom saving throw, so right away, we know that anyone who looks like a cleric, druid, monk, paladin, ranger, warlock or wizard is out. Eep—that’s seven out of 12 classes! OK, 13 if you count the artificer, but it’s still a majority.
As for the rest, well, the average adventurer has an average ability score of 12, and if you posit a +1 Wisdom save modifier, that’s a 45 percent chance of success against Psychic Crush. Not great, and a being with Intelligence 17 can absolutely calculate odds like that. But again, it still deals half damage on a success, so we’re looking at a pretty reliable expected damage of about 11.
In contrast, against a foe with AC 11 (Dexterity 12 and no armor) or 12 (Dexterity 12 and leather armor), the psurlon has a 65 to 70 percent chance of hitting with a melee attack. But melee attacks deal no damage on a miss, making its Multiattack worth an expected 10 to 11 against them—the same as Psychic Crush, or slightly less. Against medium armor (scale mail, let’s say—AC 15) or heavy armor (chain mail—AC 17), we’re looking at only 50 percent and 40 percent chances to hit, for an expected 8 or 6 damage.
What do these figures imply? Well, if the psurlon can make decent use of Psychic Crush, it should, so that’s clearly the way to go against a barbarian, bard, fighter, rogue, sorcerer or artificer. Against a druid, warlock or wizard wearing light or no armor, a melee Multiattack makes more sense; ditto a ranger, if they’re wearing leather rather than something heavier and noisier.
A cleric or a paladin presents a more difficult case—especially the cleric, who will have maxed out their Wisdom and also has proficiency on the save, but who will also be wearing medium or heavy armor. We’re most likely looking at a +5 save mod, giving them a 65 percent chance of succeeding on the save and AC 15. In this instance, half damage on a successful save carries the day: Psychic Crush deals a fraction over 9 expected damage, vs. just shy of 8 damage for the Multiattack. Because paladins have to divide their high ability scores among three different abilities (Strength, Constitution and Charisma) and Wisdom isn’t one of them, even though they have proficiency in Wisdom saves, they’re not likely to do as well as a cleric against Psychic Crush, and they’re more likely to be wearing heavy armor, so that’s an even stronger bias in favor of Psychic Crush.
Finally, there’s the monk, with a +4 or +5 save mod and Unarmored Defense, which gives them a bonus on their Armor Class, and no way is that bonus less than +5 (+3 from Dex plus +2 from Wisdom, or vice versa). Check it out, though: These numbers put them in almost exactly the same place as the cleric. Once again, the half damage dealt on a successful save makes Psychic Crush more effective than Multiattacking.
In the end, then, Psychic Crush is to be favored against anyone except a druid, warlock, wizard or lightly armored ranger. Now, however, we’re faced with another dilemma: Three of those classes have a strong preference for attacking from afar. Sure, some warlocks are bladelocks, and some rangers are skirmishers, but the typical warlock is a tomelock, and the typical ranger is a marksman, and the psurlon has no good way to get close enough to bite and claw at them. It recognizes their weaknesses, but it can’t do anything about them. What to do? Well, remember how I said that all the psurlon’s physical ability scores are equal? If its Dex were higher than its Constitution, it would have a bias toward avoiding damage, but it’s not—so the psurlon looks at the situation, the math equations appear in the air in front of its face, and it finally decides … to suck it up. The only way to get at those opponents the way it wants to is to kill everyone in between first.
So that’s what it does, or at least tries to do—until it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 18 hp or fewer), at which point it runs away, Dashing or Disengaging as appropriate. However, once it’s gotten far enough from its enemies to put it out of range of fire bolt and eldritch blast and at long range for missile weapon attacks, it turns around and takes cheap shots at any stubborn pursuers with Psychic Crush as it goes.
Keep in mind that a single psurlon is a suitable foe only against level 1 player characters, or maybe a small level 2 party. To challenge a level 3 party, you’ll need at least a couple of them; by tier 2, one PC is more than a match for one psurlon. That’s where the psurlon leader comes in. “One out of every hundred psurlons is a mutant with two heads, one at each end of its body,” says the flavor text, completely disregarding how bilaterian embryonic development works. It’s one thing to have it fork into two heads at the front end, which is unlikely but plausible, and entirely another to have two digestive tracts meet in the middle and go nowhere else; the latter lifeform dies in infancy. Unless it’s the designers’ contention that the psurlon digestive cavity is like a flatworm’s, having only one opening used for both consumption and excretion, in which case, eww (but also, missed opportunity).
The psurlon leader’s primary offensive ability is Intelligence, but its primary defensive ability is unambiguously Constitution; it’s not afraid to take damage. But it also has a higher save DC on its Psychic Crush, so it still favors this long-range psionic assault over melee engagement. However, the construction of its Multiattack means it can engage in melee and still use Psychic Crush as well, and because Psychic Crush technically isn’t a ranged attack, it faces no close combat penalty for doing so.
It also has another psionic offensive ability, Pacify, which turns out an enemy’s lights for 10 minutes. It’s on a recharge, so this ability is strongly favored, but unlike Psychic Crush, it also has no effect on a successful saving throw, so it reserves this ability for enemies who are most likely to fail their saves (barbarians, bards, fighters, rogues, sorcerers, artificers). It’s especially good against rogues, because they’re the ones most likely to be skulking around in places where their allies can’t immediately run up to wake them—and shadows are no impediment to psurlons, thanks to their blindsight. Psurlon leaders know better than to deal damage to foes knocked unconscious by Pacify until every other opponent is taken out.
Their Intelligence is so high, in fact, that they possess an uncanny sense for how likely their opponents are to resist their powers. Psurlon leaders actually deal significantly more damage with two Bite hits and two Claw hits than when a target fails their save against Psychic Crush, which means the melee attacks are nearly always better against unarmored or lightly armored targets (except barbarians and monks, whose Unarmored Defense boosts their ACs), while Psychic Crush is always better against medium or heavy armor.
The only fuzzy area is when the target has AC 13 to 16. Against AC 13, Psychic Crush is better when the target’s Wisdom save mod is +1 or lower; against AC 14, when it’s +3 or lower; against AC 15, when it’s +5 or lower; against AC 16, when it’s +8 or lower. To look at it another way: If the target’s Wisdom save mod is +1 or lower, melee attacks are better when their AC is 12 or lower; if it’s +2 or +3, when their AC is 13 or lower; if it’s +4 or +5, when their AC is 14 or lower; if it’s +6 to +8, when their AC is 15 or lower. The psurlon leader can read PCs’ stats off their character sheets. It’s that smart.
But the psurlon leader doesn’t have to choose between one or the other: as I mentioned above, its Multiattack includes both. Rather, it uses this information to decide whom to target with its melee attacks and whom to target with Psychic Crush, based on who’s within reach of the former and within range of the latter. (Targeting Pacify is trivial: Start with the opponent with the lowest Wisdom save mod and work your way up.)
Like the standard psurlon, the psurlon leader is good at figuring out which method of attack will hurt an opponent the most but not especially thoughtful about which opponent it should be attacking; it tends to go after whoever’s closest and noisiest, whoever has done it the most harm or caused it the most offense, or some other equally arbitrary criterion. When the opponent it chooses to go after with melee attacks has a Wisdom save mod below the cutoff for its AC, it typically aims its Psychic Crush at that same opponent, unless there’s an opponent farther away who’s hassling it and whose stats make it a clear candidate.
A psurlon leader fights until it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 50 hp or fewer), then casts dimension door and portals out. It’s a “leader” in name only; it doesn’t bring its allies along with it, instead leaving them to fend for themselves. Once their leader is gone, however, other psurlons will take that as their cue to withdraw.
I haven’t really talked about the other psionic abilities of psurlons and psurlon leaders, mainly because they seem somewhat beside the point. Mage armor is trivial; assume that the psurlon always has it pre-cast. Suggestion targets only one other creature and has the same pros and cons as Psychic Crush. Most Dungeon Masters with any experience have a pretty decent idea of what that spell is and isn’t useful for, so I won’t rehash it here; I will say, though, that once a combat encounter is under way, a psurlon has better things to do with its actions. Finally, because it requires the caster to “adopt a form that has the same basic arrangement of limbs,” disguise self won’t disguise a psurlon as anything except maybe a centaur—in the case of the psurlon leader, one with an additional torso and head where its butt should be. That’s a flimsy disguise for “infiltrat[ing] the settlements of their intended victims,” as the flavor text suggests. Unfortunately, there’s nothing in the stat block to indicate that a psurlon can use disguise self to take on a more conventionally humanoid form, or any other. The spell also doesn’t allow the psurlon to speak any language it doesn’t know already. That’s a major complication, since the only language it knows is Deep Speech, and the only other means of communication it has is beaming its thoughts directly into others’ minds. Neither of those is likely to make the average person think, “This is fine.”
The psurlon ringer, according to the flavor text—not according to its stat block—can disguise itself as a Medium humanoid, but only a specific one, and it has to eat them first. It’s sort of a bum deal for the psurlon, because it goes from being CR 2 to CR 1, but it does allow it to move among other folk more inconspicuously and speak normally. The damage of its Psychic Crush is attenuated, but only slightly, and it still has the same advantages over its melee Multiattack, in the same situations, as it does for the standard psurlon.
The only other significant difference between the psurlon ringer and the standard psurlon is its ability contour. Its mental abilities are the same, but its physical abilities are reduced to those of a more average humanoid. Instead of all three being equal, however, its Dexterity is slightly higher than its Strength and Con. Mathematically, it makes no difference, but if we assume the variation is meaningful, the psurlon ringer has a mild preference for keeping its distance from its foes. When it uses Psychic Crush, it does so from as far away as it can while keeping its target in sight. When it uses weapons, it approaches no closer than 20 feet, throws its daggers rather than stab with them (per the “Statistics” section of the introduction to the Monster Manual, it carries 2d4 of them), then immediately backs up to a safer distance using all its movement. If engaged in melee, it immediately Disengages and moves as far away as it can, and it flees when seriously wounded (reduced to 12 hp or fewer).
And that’s it for Spelljammer. Have a happy new year, and I’ll see you in 2024 with Strixhaven.
Just kidding. Planescape.
