## Megapede, B’rohg and Braxat Tactics


Last time I promised megapedes, but you get two bonus monsters today, because I’m trying to get Spelljammer behind me by the end of the year and it turns out that none of the three are particularly complicated.
The megapede is exactly what its name promises: a 100-foot-long bug with too many legs. The stat block and the flavor text seem to have been written by two different people. The flavor text says it buries itself in the sand and ambushes passers-by, but it has neither a burrowing speed nor blindsight nor tremorsense. The flavor text also says it can be found in “cavernous underground chambers,” and it does have a climbing speed, but not the Spider Climb trait, so it’s not going to get very far up the wall, and it definitely won’t be hanging out on the ceiling. Proficiency in Stealth and expertise in Perception are an ambush predator combination for sure, but I’m not sure where this megabeastie is supposed to hide if it wants to spot prey without being spotted itself.
With extraordinary Strength, very high Constitution and not much else to speak of, the megapede was never going to be anything but a brute melee fighter, charging its prey as soon as they come within 40 feet of it. Its Multiattack consists of one Bite attack and its choice of two other actions, and the only choice to be made is which of those two actions it takes.

Life Drain is an area-effect necrotic assault with a 15-foot radius. Psychic Bomb is a single-target psychic assault with a 60-foot range. Given its greater range and the fact that predators generally only try to catch one prey creature at a time, I’d say Psychic Bomb is the default; the megapede uses Life Drain only when three or more enemies surround it within that 15-foot radius, and it does so primarily to induce them to back off. When it manages to bring down a victim, it continues to Bite them until they’re dead—that is, it eats them, right then and there.
With Intelligence 1, it’s never going to deviate from this rule, and with Wisdom 10, it has no more sophisticated method of choosing its targets than the standard predator principle of targeting the old, the young, the weak, the isolated and the oblivious. Other predators dislike when prey fights back and withdraw from a fight when they’re moderately wounded (for the megapede, that means when it’s reduced to 122 hp or fewer), but this one is stupid enough that it might keep trying until it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 70 hp or fewer). Honestly, though, I think the sheer size of this thing means that almost nothing ever tries to fight back against it, and the shock of getting hurt by its intended breakfast may be such an unusual experience that it doesn’t take a whole lot of damage to make it back off. It Dashes when it retreats because it has no idea how to do anything else.
Of the two Dark Sun giants in Boo’s Astral Menagerie, the easier foe is the b’rohg, essentially a four-armed hill giant. Its non-Strength ability scores are a bit better than a hill giant’s, but not enough to make a difference; also like the hill giant, the b’rohg gets twice as many melee attacks as ranged attacks from its Multiattack. Therefore, it fights the same way, charging its foes and throwing rocks until it gets close enough to pound them.
There is one difference between the b’rohg and the hill giant, aside from the number of arms, and that’s Hideous Rend. This ability does about the same amount of damage as the b’rohg’s melee Multiattack, and it has the same reach. However, instead of targeting the opponent’s Armor Class, it puts the burden on the opponent to make a saving throw against it. Also, the damage is all-or-nothing, whereas a Multiattacking b’rohg might hit twice and miss twice, miss once and hit three times, etc.
Tactically, these facts indicate that Hideous Rend is better against low-Dexterity, high-AC opponents, like many fighters and most paladins, while against skirmishers, it’s better to stick with the Multiattack. Unfortunately for the b’rohg, it’s not smart enough to make this assessment. You can follow the flavor text and give it an overall preference for Hideous Rend all the time, but I’m inclined to say that the simpler Multiattack is the default and that it resorts to Hideous Rend only when it’s especially angry or frustrated.
Like hill giants, b’rohgs run away when seriously wounded (reduced to 36 hp or fewer).
The braxat is also a gigantic melee-centric brute, but unlike the b’rohg, the braxat is clever and prudent. It doesn’t throw rocks, but it does have several additional abilities: the passive Intellect Fortress, damaging Acid Breath, two psionic “spells,” and a defensive Psionic Shield that it deploys as a reflex whenever an opponent it can see rolls an 18 to 22 on an attack. (It can use Psionic Shield to defend itself from magic missile as well, but it has so many hit points, it knows not to bother! As a CR 9 creature, it’s not likely to encounter an enemy who’ll ever cast magic missile at higher than 6th level, at which it deals an average of 28 damage—and what wizard blows a 6th-level spell slot on magic missile when they could cast disintegrate instead? Save Psionic Shield for the melee fighters and marksmen; it will probably end up using it nearly every combat round anyway.)
According to the flavor text, braxats use Acid Breath “only as a last resort, since the acid dissolves and ruins the flesh they crave,” which I’ll buy, since the fact that it recharges only on a 6 means the braxat most likely won’t get to use it more than once per combat encounter. In fact, since the braxat’s Wisdom is high enough for it to stop and attempt to parley when it recognizes that it’s outmatched, let’s go a step further and say that it uses Acid Breath only when (a) there are at least two opponents in the conical area of effect and (b) it’s tried to parley, but talks have broken down.
The braxat can cast compulsion and fear once per day each. Fear is always weird, because it makes the targets you’re trying to attack run away from you, which is unhelpful if you want them to stay where you can pummel them. However, I note the following clause in the flavor text: “Braxats hunt alone or in pairs” (emphasis mine). Braxats have no particular aptitude for hiding, but the idea that one might use fear to flush prey toward another is an interesting one. More likely, however, I think a braxat would use compulsion to drive an unwilling victim toward itself, while a second braxat might get between the victim and its would-be defenders and cast fear to hold them at bay. I’m trying to think of a logical application of fear by a single braxat, and I’m not coming up with one. Even as a last-ditch escape measure, its effectiveness falls short of Acid Breath’s because of its lower save DC, and it doesn’t make sense to try to scare away folks who’ve already proved that they’re tougher than you.
Braxats stop attacking and talk terms when moderately wounded (reduced to 113 hp or fewer). Because of their low Charisma and lack of social skills, they’re not great at steering negotiations in directions that favor them, but they are smart enough to recognize a bad deal when they hear it; it takes a smooth-talking rascal to put one over on them. If talks are going badly, they’ll end them abruptly with a blast of Acid Breath and try to inflict as much damage as they can until they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 64 hp or fewer), at which point they retreat, Disengaging and Dodging as they go—they are intelligent enough to do more than just Dash, at least until they’re out of missile weapon range.
Next: psurlons.
