## Giff Tactics


I forgot until now that my tactics for the basic giff from Mordenkainen’s Tome of Foes and Monsters of the Multiverse are content exclusive to MOAR! Monsters Know What They’re Doing. Since the giff shipmate from Boo’s Astral Menagerie is so close to the basic giff, I’ll simply note two things that are no longer in its repertoire (the Headfirst Charge trait and the Pistol attack) and one new acquisition as of Multiverse (the inclusion of the Musket attack in the Multiattack). The consequence is that giff on offense can sustain a fusillade of musket fire as they advance on a position, while giff on defense follow more or less the same strategy as always. (It’s disappointing that the Force Grenade in Boo’s is simply the Fragmentation Grenade in Mordenkainen’s and Multiverse with the damage type changed. In astral ship-to-ship combat, it would be a great twist to give the grenade some knockback.)
The giff shock trooper isn’t all that different from the basic giff, either, aside from being much tougher and better armored. It does retain the basic giff’s Headfirst Charge and uses it in the same fashion, but the salient feature to look at is Siege Monster. A basic giff might lob a frag grenade over a wall to injure the defenders hiding behind it, and a giff shock trooper might do the same with a Thunder Bomb, but because of the Siege Monster trait, the shock trooper is equally interested in destroying the wall. The Thunder Bomb is inadequate to this task, because as written, it targets only creatures, not objects. Thus, while advancing on a fortified position, giff shock troopers focus their musket fire on the wall, and they don’t advance closer than 40 feet until the job is done.
Muskets are effective against living targets, but they’re not well suited to the task of destroying a fortification; even if loaded with Minié balls, they’re not going to do much more than blast chips off it. I might therefore reskin the giff shock trooper’s Musket attack to make it a heavy but still portable single-shot weapon—similar to a hand culverin or a lantaka—that can be fired only once per turn but deals twice as many dice of damage, 4d12 + 2 rather than 2d12 + 2. Augmenting this weapon with the Siege Monster trait makes it slightly more damaging than an ordinary cannon (see the Dungeon Master’s Guide, chapter 8, “Siege Equipment”) but with much less range, which feels right to me. In the spirit of fair play, once giff shock troopers have blown a large enough hole in a wall to rob those behind it of their cover, they throw down their porta-cannons and advance on their foes with the weapons in their stat block, employing Headfirst Charge in the manner of the basic giff.

The giff warlord, as its name implies, is a leader of troops—and in the spirit of giff honor and physical courage, it leads from the front, not the rear. Sadly, there’s not a single thing in its stat block that lends itself to an interesting tactical combination. It has a powerful ranged attack, a powerful melee attack, and legendary actions that let it make more of both those attacks from wherever it pleases. (Its Double-Barreled Musket, incidentally, has exactly the stats that I describe for the shock trooper’s hand culverin/lantaka above. But the giff warlord doesn’t have Siege Monster, so it makes more sense for its personal weapon to take the form of a two-barreled musket than of a portable cannon.)
The one interesting thing in the giff warlord’s stat block is its impressive mental abilities, including its exceptional Charisma. These are interesting because the giff warlord isn’t simply a juggernaut; it’s also a strategist and negotiator. It chooses its battles carefully and leads its troops into battle only when it’s confident of victory. It can accurately assess its enemies’ weaknesses and target them accordingly. It doesn’t go to the head without a plan.
Most salient, however, is the giff warlord’s expertise in Intimidation. It’s been noted that the social interaction rules of fifth edition Dungeons & Dragons are all worded in such a way as to reflect the behavior of non-player characters when player characters use social skills to influence them. How should one handle a successful social interaction check against a PC? Here’s how I do it: When a character or creature wins an Intimidation (or Deception) vs. Insight contest against a PC, you as the Dungeon Master tell the player that whatever the character or creature wants the PC to believe is true—not that the PC believes it’s true, but that it is true. The player believes it, because you, the DM, said so, and they can then have the PC respond or react to that knowledge however they see fit. Only if the PC wins the contest do you acknowledge to the player that it’s a bluff.
A giff warlord has a very strong chance of winning that contest, and since the skill it’s relying on is Intimidation, its goal is to try to win the fight in its enemies’ minds before they can put up an organized resistance, Sun Zi–style. That doesn’t necessarily mean it’s trying to bully its foes into an unconditional surrender. It’s proficient in Insight, too, and if it can buy an easy victory by giving its opponents something they want without compromising its own objective, it will do that. The objective, however, is paramount. Intimidation isn’t haggling; it’s projecting an image of irresistible force in order to coerce compliance. If the threat is stronger than the execution, the giff warlord reasons, then get the most you can out of the threat. There’s no particular need to be rude about it.
Next: githyanki explorers.
