## Bariaur Wanderer Tactics


Like archons and guardinals, bariaurs are the native defenders of an upper plane, in their case the chaotic good/neutral plane of Ysgard. Bariaur wanderers, however, don’t stay on the farm, guarding the coop. As it says on the label, they wander. Some serve as planar guides, and these may accompany a party of player characters as allies, but others go a-roving through less savory places, and these bariaurs may end up picking up the locals’ unsavory habits. The latter sort are more likely to be encountered as adversaries.
Bariaur wanderers have exceptional Strength, and both their Dexterity and Constitution are high, with Con slightly higher than Dex. Thus, they can play either a brute or a shock attacker combat role, leaning brute—and this inclination is reinforced by the fact that both their Armor Class and their hit points are above average for its challenge rating. Their proficiencies in Strength and Dex saving throws. Athletics, Perception, Stealth and Survival subtly imply that they’re rangers at heart, and their Portal Sense trait even implies a specific subclass: Horizon Walker. (Portal Sense is a dialed-down version of Detect Portal, with a range of only 30 feet rather than 1 mile, although it does come with the perk that bariaur wanderers instinctively know where any portal they’re looking at leads. They don’t have traits equivalent to Planar Warrior or Ethereal Step.)

While bariaur wanderers are brutes first, that doesn’t mean they can’t engage in shock attack tactics. For instance, their Ram attack rewards them for initiating their first attack from a distance, granting extra damage and possibly the prone condition if they move at least 20 feet in a straight line toward a target before attacking. Ironically, however, Ram deals the same amount of damage, on average, as a Multiattack comprising two Barbed Javelin or Shortbow attacks. The only added benefit of Ram over Multiattack is the prone rider—and since Ram is excluded from bariaur wanderers’ Multiattack action, they lack the ability to follow up with another attack before the target stands up again. This is disappointing design.
When you take that away, there’s not much left. The Mighty Leap bonus action, aside from circumventing difficult terrain and being able to move in any direction, is mechanically more or less the same as the Aggressive trait of orcs. Barbed Javelin reduces a target’s speed by 10 feet, and two Barbed Javelin hits reduce the target’s speed twice, which is solid for keeping a target from running away, but with a 40-foot base speed plus another 40 feet from Mighty Leap, bariaur wanderers are already faster than most things they might be chasing. Their Shortbow attack could be read as dealing extra damage to wounded creatures (a nod to the Colossus Slayer ability of the Hunter ranger), but given the relative damage-dealing capacity of bauriar wanderers’ various attacks, it could also be read as dealing only partial damage to unwounded creatures, and full damage only to wounded ones. All of bariaur wanderers’ spells are utilitarian. In short, unless their Planar Influence (see the introduction of Morte’s Planar Parade) grants them something more interesting, bariaur wanderers are merely elementary hit point–reducing engines. Close, jab, jab, repeat.
Bariaur wanderers withdraw from combat when seriously wounded (reduced to 28 hp or fewer), because there’s no good reason for that number to be any lower or higher.
Next: rilmani.
