## Dragon Tactics, Part 7: Time Dragons


Ugh. A week lost because the Oobit was sick; another week lost when my wife and I picked up the same bug, which turned out to be stealth COVID. If only we could rewind the clock to before all that happened. Hey, you know who can do that, though? Time dragons.
You know what else time dragons can do? Maybe, just maybe, they can give us a glimpse into the future of Dungeons & Dragons.
Time dragons hew to the same pattern established by chromatic dragons, and in particular, they seem to be modeled closely on red dragons. They have the same Armor Classes; the same numbers of hit points, or close to it (young time dragons are an odd exception, with three more hit dice than young red dragons have); the same speeds and modes of movements; the same saving throw proficiencies; the same senses, with the same ranges; and the same areas of effect on their breath weapons.
But there are differences, too, and two in particular leap out at me. First, instead of Claw and Bite attacks, time dragons—even the wyrmlings—have a Multiattack comprising three identical “Rend” attacks. Second, instead of legendary actions, they have reactions that they can use three times per round, albeit only once per turn. Timing-wise, they work out the same, but unlike legendary actions, each of these reactions has a specific trigger, as reactions do, liberating Dungeon Masters from the burden of having to think about when to use them. Could these be previews of changes to dragons—and other adversaries—coming up in the 2025 rerelease of the Monster Manual? My intuition says yes.

Getting down to the nitty gritty, time dragons have several distinctive characteristics regardless of age. Strength is their primary offensive ability, Constitution their primary defensive ability, making them melee-oriented brutes, although they also have correspondingly high Intelligence and Charisma. Unlike red dragons, time dragons have expertise in Stealth, further adapting themselves to a strategy of ambush attack. Like red dragons, however, they’re primarily nocturnal, and they attack from above, either from the air or from a branch or overhang. Time dragons “typically” are neutrally aligned, and in the alignment-soaked setting of Planescape, that’s a significant choice: They’re for no one but themselves, against no one except those who choose to oppose them. Let the factions squabble. All the time dragons care about is gathering more lore for their hoards.
Additionally, in the manner of chromatic dragons, time dragons supplement their melee attacks with a breath weapon on a 5–6 recharge. This breath weapon is significantly more potent than their Multiattack action, and a time dragon that chooses to fight makes use of it whenever it’s available, positioning itself first so as to capture a minimum number of enemy targets in the conical area of effect. Ideally, these targets are those who’ll be more likely to flub the Constitution saving throw against it; that’s not mandatory, since even those who succeed take damage from it, but it’s preferable, since only those who fail will suffer the rider effects.
Time dragon wyrmlings, like red dragon wyrmlings, begin life as scrappy little brutes, but ones who don’t much care for fighting more than one melee opponent at a time. They use their Time Breath when they can strike at least two opponents at once, and after using it, they reposition themselves to get out of reach of whichever of their foes takes the brunt of their breath weapon, counting on its side effects to nerf any opportunity attack. If they have room to maneuver, they fight from the air, swooping down to Multiattack, then back up out of reach between turns, dive-bombing opponents who are least equipped to fend off melee attacks. They’re good at choosing targets and will parley (or, more likely, flee) when they realize they’re outmatched, but they don’t quite have the maturity to refrain from starting fights they can’t win. Unlike most wyrmlings, they can speak languages other than Draconic.
If it weren’t for their innate draconic arrogance, they’d probably flee when moderately wounded, but as it is, it takes being seriously wounded (reduced to 30 hp or fewer) to get them to withdraw.
Young time dragons are more careful about which scrapes they get into, but aside from that, they have essentially the same modus operandi as time dragon wyrmlings. They use their Time Breath against at least three foes at once and are willing to engage either one or two melee opponents. They’re seriously wounded at 84 hp or fewer, but they’ll pause to parley at 147 hp or fewer if an opening presents itself.
Adult time dragons have a breath weapon cone that can (and should) envelop at least six enemies—or all of them, if there are fewer than six. Their non-legendary reactions are Reactive Rend, Slow Time and Time Slip, and because they’re reactions, they specify what events trigger their use. However, they do have a few non-obvious implications.
For instance, Reactive Rend allows an adult or ancient time dragon to make a Rend attack after being hit by an enemy attack or forced to use Legendary Resistance to un-fail a saving throw … but it doesn’t allow the dragon to move before making that attack. It’s important, therefore, that even though an adult time dragon likes to stay out of its foes’ reach between turns, it doesn’t stay too far out of reach. Instead, it stays 10 feet away, just beyond the melee reach of a typical enemy but close enough for the enemy to remain within reach of it.
Slow Time causes a creature weakened by Time Breath to slow to a stop. It would be a waste for a time dragon not to seize this opportunity to lay into them when its own turn comes around. Since any such opponent is likely to be one with lower Constitution, this circumstance presents an ideal opportunity to smash a glass cannon. The time dragon shouldn’t waste it on a foe with lower damage output.
Time Slip is a reaction to a hit, and unlike a legendary action, it can take place mid-turn; a time dragon doesn’t have to wait until the end of another creature’s turn to use it. This fact makes Time Slip an excellent jerk move to use against an opponent who gets to make three or four attacks per turn. If the first attack roll hits, the time dragon simply teleports up out of reach, and the opponent can only daydream about how nice it would be to be able to make the rest of their attacks. Time Slip is best when the opponent has at least two more attacks remaining; if the first two attacks of the opponent’s turn miss but the last one lands, an adult time dragon is probably wiser to use Reactive Rend instead.
There are also three lair actions available to an adult time dragon in its hidey-hole: Temporal Fling, Temporal Lag and Timeline Divergence. Temporal Fling is essentially a brief banishment from battle, and it targets Wisdom, making it a great punishment for impertinent rogues, along with fighters who’ve neglected their more spiritual side. Timeline Divergence is a cute trick, but unless the time dragon’s lair is significantly greater than 60 feet in diameter, the dragon can simply fly wherever it wants to be. It’s only really useful in a much larger lair or in the specific circumstance of wanting to use its Time Breath from one location and Reactive Rend from another. Temporal Lag has a whopping 60-foot radius and neither requires nor allows any saving throw against it. It’s extremely powerful and the obvious default—but note that, unlike the slow spell, it does not prevent a slowed foe from making more than one attack on their turn, if they normally can. (I wonder whether this omission is an oversight.)
An adult time dragon will pause to talk terms when moderately wounded (reduced to 175 hp or fewer) and fly the coop when seriously wounded (reduced to 100 hp or fewer).
Ancient time dragons have all of the above, plus Cycle of Rebirth and Time Gate. Cycle of Rebirth means the ancient time dragon has no fear of death; it will parley when moderately wounded (reduced to 375 hp or fewer), but being seriously wounded has no further effect on it.
Time Gate, the (possibly unintentionally) most awesomely bonkers ability I’ve seen in all of fifth edition D&D, lets an ancient time dragon conjure a spacetime portal to a point on any plane, up to 8,000 years into the past or future. Said portal is 20 feet in diameter and can be opened either at a fixed point in space or between the ancient time dragon’s horns. The former is a favor. The latter is a weapon. Draw a 20-foot-diameter circle anywhere on the battlefield. Anyone who’s in that circle, the ancient time dragon can slam its horns down around, like the weirdos in my high school lunchroom who used to spend their time smashing empty Mountain Dew cans flat on the tabletops with their foreheads, and thereby dispatch them to Evereska during the Founding Time, or the Nine Hells on Asmodeus’s birthday, or the Battle of the Somme.
Of course, an ancient time dragon isn’t going to simply wait and see whether its opponents are going to cluster up, neatly arranged for transport. This thing has Intelligence 27. It’s going to herd them. Or, more likely, lure them, by constructing its lair in such a way that only certain places seem safe from it. Once its opponents obligingly herd themselves into their apparent shelter, it can swoop down upon them and send them on their unforgettable journey. It might even pause to parley, see whether its antagonists can be reasoned with, then abruptly cut the discussion short with the Express Tunnel to Whenever.

These portals are one-way, front-to-back, but if an ancient time dragon keeps one open, there’s always a chance that anyone sent through it can run around the other side and come back. Thus, the dragon wants to be able to close the portal immediately as soon as it’s sent its enemies through, and because of that, it doesn’t want to miss anyone. That’s what makes it so important to ensure that its enemies group up before it uses Time Gate. It’s only got one shot at making this stunt work. Design your ancient time dragon’s lair accordingly, and very carefully. It would. You can count on it.
Next: githzerai.
