## Radiant Idol Tactics

The radiant idol is another Eberron entity that didn’t survive the transition to Eberron: Rising From the Last War intact. Originally, every radiant idol was a being with its own unique domain, sort of like the cleric domains in fifth-edition Dungeons & Dragons, and powers that related directly to that domain. In this most recent sourcebook, radiant idols are simply fallen celestials, with no particular bailiwick and the same powers across the board. Craving adoration, they amass cults of devotees, but the relationship sends both worshipers and worshipees into spirals of psychological disintegration.
Radiant idols’ ability scores are uniformly high, in a gently sloping contour that you don’t see too often. Five of those scores form a straight, from Intelligence 17 to Charisma 21; their highest ability score, Strength, takes a hop up to 23. This deviation—which really isn’t much of one—gives them a slight bias toward melee engagement. But with ability scores like these, radiant idols can fight pretty much any way they like. Unlike most creatures, which have one favored combat role and stick to it, radiant idols are distinguished by their flexibility.
One way this flexibility manifests is an extreme unwillingness to get into any fight they can’t win, and another is a pronounced preference for talking first. Whenever they can, radiant idols try to get their way without fighting. With that extraordinary Charisma and proficiency in Persuasion, Deception and Insight, along with an immunity to being charmed and an Aura of False Divinity that can passively charm others, radiant idols can dominate social interaction encounters in a way they can only wish they could in combat. And if logos, ethos and pathos don’t do the trick, they can always try dominate person or mass suggestion, depending on whether they’re trying to sway one or many.
In combat, radiant idols have a couple of good reasons to take out pious foes first. For one thing, clerics, druids and paladins are likely to have high Wisdom saving throws and therefore to be more resistant to magical manipulation, including Aura of False Divinity. For another, they’re likely to be proficient in Religion and thus to know the specific lore concerning their existence, or at least to figure out more quickly that radiant idols aren’t the beneficent angels they appear to be.
However, radiant idols are resistant to radiant damage, which clerics and paladins, at least, dish out a lot of. They also have Magic Resistance, which confers advantage on saves against spells and other magical effects. What they don’t have is any good way to shrug off a direct attack with a magic weapon or spell. Armor Class 18 is nothing special in mid- to upper-level play, which is where they’ll most likely be encountered. Thus, while clobbering Sister Frances Purelight or Sir Roland of Smite might be satisfying, the real threats when the fur starts to fly are Angus MacBash’s +2 greatsword and Fyra Arkayne’s upcast scorching ray. And radiant idols are absolutely smart enough to know it.
An excellent answer to Fyra, as well as any other pesky ranged attacker, is insect plague, which targets Constitution, but it’s not going to be especially effective against Angus, who’s likely to (a) have a high Con and (b) be right up in a radiant idol’s face. Using dominate person to turn him against his allies is consistent with the radiant idol’s style, but you know what’s just as good? Two solid smacks with a flail, which it’s well equipped to deliver.
A radiant idol has to have its finger on the pulse of a social interaction encounter and be alert to signs that it may turn into combat at any moment. That’s because it has a very powerful ability that it can use only once per day, and the best time to use it is at the outset of combat, against all its opponents—but it needs to make sure that it’s not in the area of effect itself when it does.
The ability is the Radiant Strike action, which has a huge radius and deals about as much damage as a 7th-level flame strike over the same area as the 5th-level spell dawn. It deals exclusively radiant damage, which the radiant idol is resistant to but not immune to. Therefore, to catch at least six enemies in the blast—or all of them, whichever is less—the radiant idol has to make sure it isn’t surrounded when combat begins. As soon as the social interaction encounter starts to move in a less-talk-more-rock direction, the fallen angel starts backing toward the door, or the corner, or wherever else it needs to be to put at least 30 feet between itself and ground zero.
Because of this need for space, radiant idols—which, remember, have exceptional Intelligence and extraordinary Wisdom—don’t meet with potential enemies in close quarters. Since they’re religious hucksters par excellence, you can bet they’ve bidden their adherents to build them houses of worship with nice, big naves, perfect for Large creatures with a 40-foot movement speed to zip around in. Even better, they can put hallow spells on them that make visitors vulnerable to radiant damage—although they’ll need the help of a level 9 or higher cleric for that, since that’s not a spell they themselves can cast.
Here’s the order of operations, then: First, try to win without fighting. When fighting is inevitable, Radiant Strike. After that, if the biggest problem is one or more enemies with ranged spell attacks or magic ranged weapons, and if they’re clustered enough that at least two and preferably four or more can be targeted in a 20-foot-radius sphere, cast insect plague. If the biggest problem is a foe with a magic melee weapon, either dominate person or Flail away.
When it comes right down to it, once combat starts and a radiant idol has used its Radiant Strike, Flail and insect plague are the only damage options it has left—and if its concentration on insect plague is broken, it’s down to just Flail, because it can cast insect plague only once per day. It has to be pretty sure of its target to use dominate person to turn an enemy against their allies, since its spell save DC is good but not amazing. It’s smart, but it’s not smart enough to read PCs’ stats off their character sheets. After at least one full round of combat or a beginning-to-end social interaction encounter, make a Wisdom (Insight) check on the radiant idol’s behalf, contested by the target’s Charisma (Deception), to represent taking the measure of a foe it might try to dominate. If it’s successful, it knows whether the target’s Wisdom save modifier is +3 or greater or +2 or less, and it takes chances only on the latter.
With their extraordinary Wisdom, you’d expect radiant idols to have strong self-preservation instincts, but the longer they imbibe the sweet nectar of worshipful adoration, the more fanatical they get. Is a radiant idol relatively new to the charlatanry game? Then it probably wants to live long enough to try again someplace more gullible, and it probably also doesn’t have as strong a base to support it, so it flees after taking only moderate damage (reduced to 99 hp or fewer). Has it been at it a while, long enough to build a decent community of followers? Then it holds out until it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 56 hp or fewer). Has it been active long enough to hit rock bottom, and is it making a desperate last stand to keep its world from crashing down around it? Then it fights to the bitter end.
Next: beasts of Valenar.
