## Eater of Knowledge Tactics


Eaters of knowledge are mighty brutes that crack open victims’ skulls like walnuts and scoop out what’s inside, not only the thinking meat but also whatever the meat had in mind. The more brains they consume, the more their psionic powers grow, using a mechanic much the same as that of the neh-thalggu in Boo’s Astral Menagerie. Neh-thalggu, however, remove brains with surgical precision. Eaters of knowledge do it … messily.
For such hulking creatures, eaters of knowledge have surprisingly formidable mental abilities—high Charisma, very high Wisdom and exceptional Intelligence. That Intelligence is on par with their Strength, allowing them to switch seamlessly between brute-force and psionic attacks. Between their very high Constitution and merely humanoid-average Dexterity, it’s not hard to figure out which one is their primary defensive ability. Eaters of knowledge get in your face and stay there, counting on their bulk to absorb incoming damage.
Let’s posit that eaters of knowledge have a single overarching goal: Consume as many brains as they safely can, then leave. They can innately cast plane shift whether they’ve consumed any brains or not, so that’s what they use to “return to their masters” (as the flavor text says) whenever they decide they’ve had enough—either enough brains or enough mistreatment. And, of course, they consume brains using the Extract Brain action, which requires an incapacitated target. So how do they incapacitate their targets?

One way is through their Multiattack, which comprises two Slam attacks. Slam, by itself, doesn’t incapacitate. However, the Multiattack contains a mechanism by which it can stun a creature if (a) both Slam attacks are directed against it, (b) both Slam attacks hit, and (c) the creature fails an Intelligence saving throw. Intelligence being a popular dump stat, most PCs who aren’t wizards, artificers, druids or rogues will fail that save—wizards and artificers because, unlike everyone else, they actually use Intelligence; druids and rogues because they have proficiency in Int saves. Since eaters of knowledge are well endowed with both Intelligence and Wisdom, they have the good sense to prioritize targets of other classes before trying to take these opponents on. The stunned condition includes incapacitation, so a successful Multiattack moves them closer to their goal.
It’s worth noting here that if an eater of knowledge is actually trying to stun a target so that it can consume their brain, it always makes both Slam attacks against that same target. If it divided its attacks, it wouldn’t gain that ancillary benefit. The corollary of that observation is that if it’s attacking a wizard, artificer, druid or rogue, whom it’s not as likely to succeed in stunning anyway, it has no particular reason not to divide its attacks if it has more than one of these targets within the reach. On the other hand, why not attack one of these targets twice, just on the off chance? Slim is better than none.
That’s one option. Depending on how many brains an eater of knowledge has consumed, however, there may be others. Let’s go down the list of psionic powers, from highest to lowest cost:

Mass suggestion is a tricky one. Despite its being a psionic ability, targets make Wisdom saving throws to resist it, and far fewer player characters dump Wisdom than dump Intelligence. Also, as with any suggestion spell, it can be challenging to settle on an effectively phrased suggestion, one that sounds reasonable yet serves the caster’s interests, and it requires forethought. I’m not convinced that “Keep your distance while I decerebrate your friend” can be phrased in a way that sounds reasonable, even if it’s framed in terms of self-preservation.
Greater invisibility is potent and dangerous, significantly increasing the likelihood of landing two Slam hits, even against a target with a high Armor Class. But it does require concentration, which means it can’t be combined with most of the following.
Mislead, surprisingly, isn’t all that much more beneficial to an eater of knowledge than ordinary invisibility. Not many people are going to want to engage in conversation with an eater of knowledge—it doesn’t use spoken language anyway, and probably doesn’t have anything it wants to talk to anyone else about—and the moment someone attacks the illusory double, the jig is up. It does, however, provide the moment of shock when its opponents realize that the real eater of knowledge must still be around somewhere.
Arcane eye is useful for reconnaissance but not for much else.
Telekinesis is a good way to dispose of a pesky wizard or rogue whose brain an eater of knowledge probably isn’t going to get to consume anyway, provided there’s a handy cliff, crevasse or lava flow nearby. And if not, you can always follow my suggestion from MOAR! Monsters Know What They’re Doing, page 295: Telekinetically hoist a half-ton rock over the opponent’s head, then drop the spell and the rock, giving the opponent a DC 15 Dexterity save to avoid 10d10 bludgeoning damage (Dungeon Master’s Guide, chapter 8, “Improvising Damage,” and chapter 9, “Spell Damage”), with no damage dealt on a success. Probably don’t want to try that against the rogue.
Major image might lure some creatures close enough for an eater of knowledge to get the jump on them, but nothing else in the stat block paints it as an ambush predator, so I’m not sure it’s the best use of the eater’s action.
Hypnotic pattern is a highly effective way of incapacitating a whole bunch of opponents at once, allowing an eater of knowledge to cut straight to Extracting Brains. This “spell” is a good way to deal with heavily armored fighters who might be harder to land two Slam hits against.
Invisibility grants advantage on one Slam hit, as well as uncertainty about who the target is going to be—an inarguable plus.
Silent image is major image, but less effective. Good for depicting inanimate objects only.
Detect magic is useful for reconnaissance but not for much else.

Hands down, the best “spell” in this list is hypnotic pattern, followed by greater invisibility, mislead/invisibility and perhaps telekinesis. Most of the others aren’t worth bothering with, with the possible exception of major image/silent image.
Putting it all together, the eater of knowledge kicks off combat with the best illusion power it has available, then works its way through its opponents, starting with whoever possesses the best apparent combination of easy to hit and not too bright. That first choice of target is an educated guess, unless the eater has had a chance to spy on a group with arcane eye. But after just one round’s worth of observation, it’s got all the information it needs, and it can effectively prioritize its targets, ranking them first by Intelligence (low to high), second by Strength (Athletics) and Dexterity (Acrobatics) bonus (low to high), and third by AC (low to high).
Once an eater of knowledge has gone through all the easy targets (i.e., those without high Intelligence or proficiency on Int saves), it has to decide whether to conclude its business or to stick around and try to consume even more brains. If it’s barely scratched or only lightly wounded (reduced to between 91 and 72 hp), it may as well stay and try its luck. However, if it’s moderately wounded (reduced to 71 hp or fewer), it departs after all its easy targets are finished off. When it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 40 hp or fewer), it plane shifts out, whether its work is done or not.
Next: darkweavers.
