## Reigar and Zodar Tactics


Reigar take the phrase “creative destruction” to a new level. Alien aesthetes with a penchant for the old ultraviolence, they destroyed their home planet as some kind of epic performance art piece, and apparently they now travel around making sequels to it.
Despite their exceptional Strength, their primary offensive ability is their extraordinary Charisma, indicating that they favor their psionic powers over their melee weapon attack. With a high Dexterity and a merely above-average Constitution (effectively, it’s their “dump stat”), they prefer to keep their distance from their opponents in combat, even though they get two Trident attacks per action from their Multiattack versus a single Chromatic Bolt. That one bolt deals as much or more damage on a hit than two weapon hits, anyway.
Aside from Chromatic Bolt, the reigar has one use per day each of mass suggestion and sending and two per day of dimension door and phantasmal force. Set aside the dimension doors, which are for entry and exit, and sending, which has no direct combat application. Mass suggestion is more powerful and affects more targets at once, so that’s obviously the go-to. Phantasmal force, which deals 1d6 damage per turn at most to just one target hardly seems worth casting at all, to be frank. It’s such a weak hit that mid- to high-level PCs will immediately suspect that what they’re seeing isn’t real, and its sensory effects are limited to a 10-foot cube. I honestly wonder how this spell was intended to be used—purely for embellishment, perhaps?

Then we have Summon Golem, which might as well be called Summon Duplicate, except the duplicate is technically a construct. This action raised a question in my mind: If a reigar summons a duplicate of itself, is the duplicate also CR 8, or is the first reigar CR 8 because it can summon a duplicate? Performing a quick-and-dirty calculation using the “Creating a Monster” rules in chapter 9 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide, I got a base defensive CR of 4 and a base offensive CR of 6; its several saving throw proficiencies increase its DCR to 5. So a lone reigar with no duplicate is, what, CR 5½? If you split the difference between the XP values of a CR 5 foe and a CR 6 foe, you get 2,050, and double that is 4,100, which does suggest CR 8. However, summoning the duplicate also increases the encounter multiplier by adding another opponent, so the adjusted XP value of the original reigar becomes (2,050 × 2) × 1.5, or 6,150, which is more like CR 10. It don’t make no kind of sense—but it does, I think, support the hypothesis that the reigar’s CR 8 anticipates the summoning of the “golem.”
To take advantage of the additional action economy, reigar must summon their duplicates in the first round of a combat encounter, if not before, to get them onto the field. The following round, they follow up with mass suggestion, to get their opponents to, I don’t know, sing “hooray” for the hardness of walls or something. I mean, the sensible strategic application of mass suggestion would be to try to get as many opponents as possible to opt themselves out of combat, but according to the flavor text, “every act of violence [reigar] commit is done with the intent of creating something beautiful,” so they’re probably not doing the sensible strategic thing; they’re doing some sort of aesthetically inspired thing instead. After that, they just shoot Chromatic Bolts, because nothing else makes sense.
With their extraordinary Intelligence and very high Wisdom, reigar don’t seem as though they’d run away when seriously wounded, like some common monster. Instead, they’ll either peace out as soon as they start to take more than minor damage—say, when they’re reduced to 57 hp or fewer—or fight to the death and go out in a blaze of glory.
I wish there were more to them. I wish they had some kind of tactical combination or interesting choice to make. In the spirit of art criticism, I’ll ask the three questions of Henry James: “What is this stat block trying to do? Does it do it? Is it worth doing?” But, alas, the best answers I can come up with are, “I’m not sure,” “I don’t think so,” and “Probably not.”
Now, zodars I like, because they’re genuinely weird, not simply some teenage boy who just read A Clockwork Orange’s idea of “weird.” Zodars are aberrations, and they act like aberrations, which is to say, in no way that makes clear sense to anyone else. Most of the time, they do nothing but “hover in silence.” Occasionally, they do something. On the rarest of occasions, they say something. Either way, immediately afterward, they go back to idling. None of this behavior is purposeless, however, and while a zodar’s purpose might possibly involve belligerence, the only sure way to get in a fight with one is to meddle with it.
Zodars have extraordinary Constitution and bonkers Strength; they are, without question, melee-oriented brutes. Their most distinctive action is Forced Teleport, or as I think of it, “Take Out the Trash.” This action requires a Constitution saving throw with a high DC, and on a failure, it relocates the target up to 60 feet and deals 4d10 crumpling force damage. The one disappointing thing about Forced Teleport is that it explicitly stipulates that the destination must be able to “support the target”: No letting targets go in midair or chucking them overboard. Although … since everyone floats in Astral Space, could the absence of gravity be construed as a form of support? In other words, could Forced Teleport be used to teleport a target not immediately off the edge of a ship, where the air envelope creates a gravity plane, but beyond the envelope, where the plane doesn’t extend? That’s a question to chew on.
That being said, Forced Teleport doesn’t just take out the trash; it can also be used to bring the trash in. The zodar’s Multiattack allows it to Forced Teleport either before or after making two Crushing Fist attacks. Thus, if someone is poking at a zodar from less than 60 feet away, it can Forced Teleport them to its side, then pummel them twice. On the other hand, if someone marches right up to a zodar and disturbs it, it can pummel them twice, then give them the heave-ho. Either way, if the target fails the saving throw and both attacks hit, that’s an average of 64 damage in one round.
The best thing about zodars is that, unless their purpose is specifically to hurt someone—who knows why?—their default state is indifference. After they’ve pummeled you, crumpled you up and tossed you in the bin, as far as they’re concerned, that settles that; they return to whatever they were doing before you came along, which may be nothing at all except waiting to receive instructions. If their opponents persist in fighting, however, so do they. No amount of damage will make them retreat.
Wish is a wild ability, and a zodar could easily use it to cast sunburst or fire storm, but this would be a pyrrhic victory at best. Much better to reserve Wish for out-of-combat use, as the player characters get to witness a zodar performing the final act of its existence—and the surprising transformations that act brings about.
Next: scavvers.
