## Dragon Tactics, Part 4: Greatwyrms

A dragon is considered ancient when it celebrates its 801st birthday … but then what? How long do dragons live, anyway? What if there were a dragon alive today that had been born during the early dynastic period of ancient Egypt, 5,000 years ago—or that was already ancient when that period began? What if there were a dragon that could tell you stories of its conversations with Huangdi and its narrow escape from Gilgamesh like they happened just yesterday?
And what if it just … kept … getting … bigger?
Well, then you’ve got something of another class altogether, something verging on demigodhood. Something that, as far as anyone alive knows, has always existed, like an ocean or the moon. Something beyond the capacity of history, legend and even myth to describe: a greatwyrm.
I feel like that word should be capitalized.
Three types of greatwyrms are statted out in Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons: chromatic greatwyrms, metallic greatwyrms and gem greatwyrms. Aside from some variation in the damage types they deal and are immune to, they’re not distinguished by color within each type; all greatwyrms of a type possess the same powers, ability scores and basic traits. Their stat blocks are built on the adult/ancient dragon chassis, with one or two alterations and several embellishments.
Chromatic greatwyrms’ ability contour is essentially the same as that of adult and ancient chromatic dragons: formidable across the board, but most so in Strength and Constitution, making them melee-oriented brutes by nature. Their saving throw proficiencies are the same. In addition to Perception and Stealth, they have proficiency in Intimidation (with a +16 modifier!), apparently in lieu of the Frightful Presence trait, which they lack. I guess once you get up to level 20—the only echelon of adventurer qualified to take them on—whether or not you can be cowed by a greatwyrm is less a mechanical question and more the outcome of a duel of posturing. To be fair, while they can no longer impose the frightened condition, it can’t be imposed on them, either, nor can they be charmed or poisoned. Their combination of blindsight and darkvision is replaced by 120 feet of truesight, which covers both and then some.
Their Unusual Nature trait is just a ribbon. They get a fourth daily use of Legendary Resistance, a mere difference in degree. The Chromatic Awakening trait, though? That’s a game-changer. In essence, you have to kill them twice, and the second time around, they have “mythic actions”: two additional legendary actions to choose from. (I read this trait aloud to my wife, and she replied, “This is some ███████ Dark Souls ████████ right there, is what this is.” She’s not once to mince words.)
Chromatic greatwyrms have the standard draconic offensive suite of a Claw/Claw/Bite Multiattack, a Tail attack and a breath weapon, but the Claw attacks come with a grapple/restrain rider, the Tail attack can knock its target prone, and the breath weapon’s area of effect is a bonkers 300-foot cone. (As written, even if the greatwyrm is black or blue, it’s still a cone.) The Wing Attack legendary action remains, Tail Attack is expanded to allow Claw attacks as well, and the Detect legendary action is gone; perhaps the combination of truesight and the greatwyrm’s absurdly high passive Perception render it unnecessary.
New to the legendary action list is Arcane Spear, which at first glance strikes me as weirdly weak for something that costs three actions, even though it fires four bolts and hits automatically; it also isn’t very thematic. However, if instead of flinging those bolts in four directions, you treat it as a magic missile against a single annoying target who won’t let the greatwyrm get within 60 feet of them, then it becomes one attack dealing 50 damage on average, which makes it more worthy of consideration, although I’m still not certain it’s worth three whole legendary actions. It does, however, have some merit as a legitimately evil way to assassinate a seriously wounded enemy who’s trying to get away—presuming, of course, that the chromatic greatwyrm is in fact evil.
Now, Chromatic Flare—one of the greatwyrm’s two mythic actions, the other being Bite, which upgrades the damage from Tail and Claw—is thematic, and it makes it perilous for the greatwyrm’s enemies to remain within 60 feet of it. So, naturally, the greatwyrm always wants to try to get within 60 feet of its enemies. It’s a somewhat nimble brute, a flying brute, a brute with ranged attacks and a devastating breath weapon, but it’s still a brute, and whenever it’s not using that breath weapon, it wants to get in and mix it up with tooth and claw.
For those of us with memories of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons, the phrase “Claw/Claw/Bite” has the cozy familiarity of a schoolyard rhyme, but in fifth edition D&D, there’s no need to execute an adult or ancient chromatic dragon’s Multiattack in any particular order. That changes with the chromatic greatwyrm, because the grapple/restrain rider of the Claw attack means it should be used first, so as to potentially confer advantage on subsequent attacks. The Bite is the big finish, dealing nearly twice as much total damage, on average, as Claw. You want to make sure that one hits. Claw/Claw/Bite is the sequence that maximizes the likelihood that it will.
On its turn, therefore, the airborne dragon—always airborne, unless it’s knocked down—uses its Breath Weapon whenever it’s available and otherwise Multiattacks from a distance of 10 feet, the reach of its Claw attack. In most cases, it uses its legendary actions to retaliate against enemies who successfully deal damage to it above a certain threshold, let’s say 40 or 50 damage, and otherwise to take potshots at targets of opportunity if its chances to use those legendary actions are running out. Because of the much larger radius of Wing Attack (30 feet instead of 10 feet), it’s no longer something to use automatically when the dragon is engaged in melee by two or three opponents at once, but rather if and only if any number of opponents within that 30-foot radius are causing it enough difficulty that relocation is necessary. If it’s in the post–Chromatic Awakening phase of the fight, though, it’s totally going to use Chromatic Flare to cook everyone within reach instead, using its third legendary action to deliver a mop-up Bite. Arcane Spear? Only if all its opponents refuse to come anywhere near it and just lob damage at it from more than 180 feet away, I think.
Will a chromatic greatwyrm ever flee, at all? I mean, it’s lived for who knows how long; surely it’s not done yet. But would the ocean ever run away if you attacked it? Would the moon? Perhaps most saliently, would a Dark Souls boss ever run away? At this point in the greatwyrm’s life, I think, its need to vanquish all rivals is so strong that it’s compelled to fight to the finish, whatever the outcome may be.
Metallic greatwyrms share many of the features of chromatic greatwyrms, but their Charisma equals their Strength, making it an equal contender for the role of primary offensive ability. Given the constellation of traits that all dragons possess, and the fact that metallic greatwyrms don’t possess any spellcasting ability by default, this duality doesn’t change their combat sequence: The first-resort action is Breath Weapon, the backup is Multiattack, and they still prefer close-range combat over keeping their distance—their primary defensive ability is still Constitution, after all.
Remember, though, what else you can do with Charisma: social interaction. These are good-aligned dragons—“typically,” anyway—so they’re as likely to try to manage conflict by talking through it as they are to initiate combat. Proficiency in Insight as well as Persuasion makes them adroit at “getting to yes.”
Like adult and ancient metallic dragons, metallic greatwyrms have two breath weapons, one lethal and one nonlethal, and unless they’re fighting opponents they’re certain are irredeemably evil, they’ll favor the nonlethal breath weapon over the lethal one. However, all the nonlethal breath weapons of metallic adult and ancient dragons have been collapsed into a single one, Sapping Breath, which knocks targets unconscious on failed saves and basically makes them momentarily woozy even if they succeed. Not all those breath weapons are all that and a bag of chips anyway—looking at you, Repulsion Breath—and, importantly, none of them has any effect on a successful saving throw, so this change is no loss.
Metallic greatwyrms aren’t stealthy, as chromatic greatwyrms are. Instead, they have Change Shape, which grants them the ability to take any Medium or Small humanoid form—and retain all their game stats as they do so, which is hilarious and awesome, because it means a metallic greatwyrm in disguise can take the form of a flying, burrowing, fire-breathing gnome with a vicious Claw/Claw/Bite. You’ll think twice before you tangle with Levinli Messingpracht von Rootewüschti again!
Arcane Spear is absent from metallic greatwyrms’ list of legendary actions, another data point in favor of the hypothesis that Arcane Spear is specifically an eeeeevil ability used for eeeeevil purposes like killing the wounded retreating enemy. The mythic action Chromatic Flare is replaced by Shattering Roar, which affects targets within 120 feet; given that this power is unlocked only after you’ve already knocked the greatwyrm down to 0 hp once, we can safely assume that the metallic greatwyrm is no longer interested in playing nice and will unleash that thunder damage without hesitation.
In other respects—attack sequence, positioning, maneuvering, when to flee—we can comfortably say that the heuristics of chromatic greatwyrms apply to metallic greatwyrms as well.
Gem greatwyrms similarly swap Stealth proficiency for Change Shape, retaining all game statistics other than size in their disguised forms, and are universally proficient in Arcana, History and Perception. Their ability contour peaks in Intelligence, however, meaning their first inclination is to use their psionics—and their wits—rather than a brute-force Multiattack or even their Breath Weapon. Gem dragons in general are described in Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons as reclusive, and I think their preference is probably to avoid combat altogether if they can. Their conflict avoidance strategy is doubly sensible because their psionic spellcasting repertoire is extremely limited: despite comprising such powerhouse spells as forcecage, plane shift, reverse gravity and time stop, they can use those powers only once per day each. A gem dragon can’t afford to blow any of those at the wrong moment.
In addition to being able to fly, gem greatwyrms—unlike chromatic and metallic greatwyrms—are able to hover, and they’re immune to the prone condition as well as to being charmed, frightened or poisoned. This combination of traits means that they can’t be knocked out of the sky. Also, look at their legendary actions: no Wing Attack. Taking all these differences into consideration, gem greatwyrms have no reason ever to descend to the ground if a fight has begun, or if it looks like one is imminent—and if they do, most likely because they can’t exit the field of battle by flying away, they immediately burrow into it.
I posit above that chromatic and metallic greatwyrms never flee. Gem greatwyrms, though, flee right away. They don’t even have to be hurt. They’ve concluded over their 12-plus centuries of life that discretion is the better part of valor. If you chase after them, they’ll employ their psionic powers to ensure their escape, then Change Shape to hide in plain sight.
This conclusion is unsatisfying, I know. The problem is that there are a couple of glitches in their stat block.
Mass Telekinesis would be a superbly useful and appropriately thematic ability to break out with in a fight. However, gem greatwyrms can’t access this ability until after they’re already reduced to 0 hp, at which point it’s activated by their Gem Awakening trait (in lieu of mythic actions, which they lack). This limitation doesn’t jibe with the flavor text, which suggests that they might use Mass Telekinesis to spirit entire crowds of people away to their lairs on a whim. If they can’t use it without being “killed” once already, then it’s not something they can do on an everyday basis, is it?
And that’s a bummer, because Mass Telekinesis is powerful, especially if you combine it with gem greatwyrms’ other abilities. Consider, for instance, the Psychic Beam legendary action, which costs three actions—a steep price for a beam only 90 feet long. It doesn’t make sense to use that effect against fewer than three opponents (and for the cost, it barely makes sense against that many), but you can never guarantee that more than two of your opponents will be lined up. Oh, wait, yes, you can, if you have the power to telekinetically move your opponents around like pieces on a chessboard! Similarly, you can shove them together into an area small enough to trap them all in a forcecage, pull them to you so that you can smack them all the way into Pandemonium with plane shift, or chuck them into the reverse gravity field you created a split-second ago with your Psionics legendary action. Or, you know, just be dull and prosaic and drop them into a bottomless pit or a lava flow.
But only if they’ve already knocked you down to 0 hp once. Boo.
There’s also dispel magic, which gem greatwyrms can cast … once per day. And since it’s not cast using a spell slot, it has to be cast at its base level, which means it only works automatically against spells of 3rd level or lower. Thanks to gem greatwyrms’ cosmic Intelligence, they have a solid chance of making it work against a 4th-, 5th- or 6th-level spell, but it’s not guaranteed. That spell has to be causing a gem greatwyrm some grievous inconvenience for it to spend both an action and its only daily use of this power to make it go away.
All right, so what do we do with this mess? One possibility is that if a gem greatwyrm has made every effort to get away but been cornered and beaten down, it turns around and decides to punish the pests who wouldn’t leave it alone.
Once a gem greatwyrm has undergone its Gem Awakening and gained access to Mass Telekinesis, it becomes outright terrifying. Not only can it put its targets anywhere it wants them—either in or out of reach of its teeth, claws, spells, Breath Weapon or Psychic Beam, as long as it keeps them within 120 feet—it can crush them. All of them. Turn after turn, as long as they don’t escape its telekinetic grip. And this power doesn’t require concentration to sustain. In fact, none of the gem greatwyrm’s powers do, except reverse gravity. No concentration conflicts to worry about here.
Don’t make a gem greatwyrm angry. You won’t like it when it’s angry.
If we’re going to play it that way, though, does it make sense for the gem greatwyrm to blow any of its once-per-day psionic abilities on its escape, when it’s more likely to need them after its Gem Awakening? Well, its psionic abilities do tend to be either defensive in nature (e.g., forcecage) or balanced between defense and offense. None of them is solely offensive—not in the way that Psychic Beam and its Breath Weapon are. And, to be blunt, plane shift is one of the best tricks a gem greatwyrm has if it wants to go where its enemies can’t bother it.
That said, there’s one thing we haven’t looked at yet: time stop.
Time stop is a powerful spell with certain parameters that make it tricky to get the highest and best use out of. It demands advance calculation to get the most out of it. These are the rules: You’ll get at least two turns out of it, no more than five, and it ends immediately if you do anything that affects another creature or anything they’re wearing or carrying, or if you travel more than 1,000 feet from the casting location. That means any action you take that deals damage is the last action you get to take. So is Mass Telekinesis—or, for that matter, any of the other psionic abilities that gem greatwyrms can use.
One of the best uses of time stop is to stack buffs on oneself (see “NPC Tactics: Archmages”), but gem greatwyrms don’t have any of those. Another is rapid withdrawal, but if you can cast plane shift as your last action, what’s the point of using any of your preceding turns to move? That said, if you want to save your plane shift for later, using time stop to move/Dash/Psychic Step several times in a row is a decent idea, especially if there isn’t a whole lot more that you can use it for.
Now, while gem greatwyrms can’t interact with other people or objects during a time stop spell without ending it, one thing they can do is use a free interaction to snatch something—even from another creature or character—just before casting time stop, then take it with them as they skedaddle. They can also operate any kind of device that requires multiple Use an Object interactions. Unfortunately, the options seem to end here. I mean, there is the possibility of using time stop to position oneself for a perfectly placed Breath Weapon or Psychic Beam, but it’s overkill for that, especially since gem greatwyrms have a 120-foot flying speed plus Psychic Step. These movement abilities allow them to travel 300 feet in a single turn, more than enough to put a Breath Weapon wherever they want it.
The upshot is that gem greatwyrms shouldn’t be shy about using time stop to put distance between themselves and their enemies, saving plane shift for either subsequent defensive use or emergency offensive use.
Next: deep dragons and sea serpents.
