## Theran Chimera Tactics


The chimera in the 2014 Monster Manual is a chaotic evil monstrosity with a challenge rating of 6; you can read my previous thoughts on it here. The Theran chimera in Mythic Odysseys of Theros has a CR of 7, reflecting a handful of tweaks to the basic chimera’s stat block: a slightly higher Dexterity, giving it a slightly higher Armor Class; slightly greater damage from its claws; proficiency in Constitution and Wisdom saving throws; and the Spell Turning trait we saw previously in the fleecemane lion. (Also, its breath weapon damage is calculated differently, but the average is roughly the same; it loses the chimera’s double proficiency in Perception; and it actually has 17 percent fewer hit points.) Finally, its Bite attack is replaced by a Tail attack with a 10-foot reach but the same damage as before, and the damage types of Head (previously Horns) and Tail (previously Bite) are swapped, with Tail dealing bludgeoning damage and Head dealing piercing.
Except for the save proficiencies, the hit points and Spell Turning, these are all fairly superficial changes. The key thing is, its ability contour doesn’t change at all, and therefore its combat role doesn’t change. It’s still a brute melee fighter. All the tactics of the basic MM chimera still apply, with one addition: The increased range on its Tail attack lets it make an opportunity attack against a foe who never got within 5 feet of it but did get within 10 and is now trying to move away.
However, all that being said, the Theran chimera isn’t just its basic stat block. It’s a Chimera Construction Set, with tables that allow you to customize its body composition, breath weapon, and head and tail attacks, and some of these changes do make a difference.

If a Theran chimera’s body is that of a plains creature, for instance, it can’t fly, so difficult terrain doesn’t favor it the way it favors a basic chimera. This kind of chimera will avoid mountains, swamps, ice and other troublesome ground. If its body is “that of a coastal or aquatic creature, such as a heron or a shark” (fly-ing shark, doo doo doo-doo doo-doo!), it gains a swimming speed and the ability to breathe water as well as air, but this modification is only advantageous if the fight is actually in or on water. This kind of chimera is still strong on land, but not as strong as it is in the water, so it instinctively prefers to initiate combat far from shore. A Theran chimera with the body of a mountain creature doesn’t provoke opportunity attacks when it flies out of an enemy’s reach—effectively granting it the Flyby trait—and thus it prefers to remain airborne at all times, ending its turn where its sword-wielding foes can’t hit it. And if it has the body of a swamp or subterranean creature, it effectively gains the Spider Climb trait, allowing it to drop down on its prey or aim its breath weapon from tree branches or cavern ceilings.
Lightning Breath changes the area of effect of the Theran chimera’s breath weapon from a 15-foot cone to a 60-foot line. It’s pretty easy to strike the two opponents necessary to make this ability worthwhile under 2014 rules, but under 2024 rules, a 60-foot linear effect is expected to strike three opponents (Dungeon Master’s Guide chapter 3, Targets in Areas of Effect), which may not always be feasible. Here I’ll emphasize that chimeras, including Theran chimeras, will reposition themselves without leaving their enemies’ reach to optimize their breath weapon attacks if they can, but they’re not above soaking up an opportunity attack or two if they have to move out of reach to get a better angle. Lightning Breath deals more damage than the baseline chimera breath weapon, so if a Theran chimera can hit three opponents with it, it’s a big deal—big enough, perhaps, to hold off using it until its enemies are properly positioned.
Tidal Wave breath has the same area of effect as Lightning Breath; it deals less damage but can knock targets prone. I would absolutely say that if a target is standing on a boat or ship with their back to the water, being knocked prone means being knocked overboard. Venom Spray and Necrotic Breath come with nasty riders but don’t offer any specific tactical advantages.
A Theran chimera with the head of a bull can execute a charge attack to deal some extra piercing damage, making it a no-brainer to initiate combat this way (logically, this head should be the chimera’s middle one, or that’s going to be one weird-looking charge). A shark head that smells blood has advantage on its attacks, incentivizing it to attack the same target over and over. A cockatrice head can petrify a target it pecks; during the petrifaction process, the target is temporarily restrained, priming follow-up attacks. A unicorn head deals extra damage but offers no tactical advantage.
A Shark Tail pushes a target it hits up to 10 feet, an even bett er method of knocking foes off their vessels and into the water. A Constricting Tail grapples and restrains, priming follow-up attacks against targets its hits. Venomous Tail has no particular tactical advantage. A Theran chimera with a Perplexing Tail loses the benefit of its 10-foot reach, and it’s advantageous only to the extent that the new head (which, according to the rules as written, must come from the Head Attacks table) has something to offer, which in my opinion excludes Bull Horns. This thing isn’t going to charge an enemy by running backward. In fact, once you have a creature with a rear attack that doesn’t come with extra reach, facing becomes a major consideration, and given fifth edition Dungeons & Dragons players’ distaste for anything involving facing, I’d simply steer clear of Perplexing Tail.
Theran chimeras might still fight to the death, but since they’re unaligned rather than chaotic evil, I’d argue that they’re more likely to behave like natural predators, with their monstrous rather than bestial nature goading them to keep attacking past the point of being merely moderately wounded. Their lower hit point maximum means that a seriously wounded chimera will withdraw when it’s reduced to 38 hp or fewer.
Next: Theran hydras.
