## Planescape Faction Agent Tactics, Part 3


The factions I’m looking at today seem almost to be defined more by their relationships with two other factions, the Bleak Cabal and the Doomguard, than by their own core ideals. The Rowdy Three–like Hands of Havoc and the total downers of the Heralds of Dust are occasional partners with those factions, while the Mind’s Eye stands in opposition to them, and they to it. These relationships give more weight to the Bleak Cabal than I think it deserves—the only Bleaker faction agents given a stat block are the void soothers, who seem awfully out of step with a faction connected with the chaotic neutral/evil plane of Pandemonium—but the Doomguard, without a doubt, are a threat to be reckoned with.
The Hands of Havoc advance their goals through their unsubtly named faction agents, Hands of Havoc fire starters (“Was tun, wenn’s brennt? Brennen lassen!”). Strong and well armored, fire starters are equally content to either attack from a distance with Havoc Flasks (though not from farther than 30 feet away—why give yourself disadvantage if you don’t need to?) or rush forth and whack at things with their Havoc Hammers. Their Wisdom is very high, on par with their Strength, but it’s not clear what they use this ability score for, other than setting their saving throw DCs.
It seems at first as though there aren’t many decisions to make with this stat block, but I can think of three.

First, their Wisdom indicates that, while they may be radicals, they’re not fools. They know better than to pick fights they can’t win, and they choose their moment to strike with care.
Second, they have an unknown but finite number of Havoc Flasks to throw. However, their Havoc Hammers deal more damage, so it’s not as easy as saying, “They throw Havoc Flasks until they run out, then charge into melee”; it may in fact be preferable for them to begin with the hammer and never switch away, or to switch away only once they’ve decided to withdraw. Looking at it from another angle, if they’re equally comfortable making either melee or ranged attacks, they may as well make ranged attacks against opponents who seem like they might favor melee and make melee attacks against opponents who seem like they’d prefer to keep their distance.
Third, radical isn’t synonymous with reckless, especially with a Wisdom score like that. My thinking is that Hands of Havoc fire starters begin to withdraw from combat when they’re only moderately wounded (reduced to 45 hp or fewer) but lob Havoc Flasks to cover their retreat, switching to Dodging when they run out.
Two final observations: Although it isn’t mentioned in Morte’s Planar Parade, Sigil and the Outlands notes that Hands of Havoc members often pose as members of other factions. It would be absolutely in character for fire starters to gain surprise by initiating combat while in disguise—even better, for a group of fire starters to initiate combat while each one is disguised as a member of a different faction. And I’m mildly disappointed that Havoc Flasks don’t deal additional damage to objects and structures, given that they’re obviously rebranded Molotov cocktails. (Behind the screen, I might have them deal an extra 2d12 thunder damage to those targets and not say anything more about it.)
On to the Heralds of Dust, who hold the not entirely indefensible belief that everyone in Sigil is dead already, and whose agenda is advanced by Heralds of Dust remnants, arcane washouts trapped between life and death. Remnants can cast mage armor at will and should therefore be assumed to have it up at all times, unless they’re caught by surprise first thing in the morning. They’re spellcasters first and foremost, but while their Constitution score is slightly higher than their Dexterity score, their modifiers are the same, so their preference for close combat is slight at best. Strikingly, they have proficiency in Perception and expertise in Stealth. They’re ambush attackers! I can envision them launching surprise attacks against members of the Mind’s Eye or the Society of Sensation, or providing unexpected backup to a group of Doomers (sorry, I can’t call them “Sinkers”).
As written, their Necrotic Surge attack, which they can use effectively at any distance between 0 and 120 feet, is a spell attack, so it’s consistent with their preferred combat role, and their Multiattack lets them make this attack twice per turn, for an average of 28 damage if both attacks hit. However, they can also cast bane, dimension door and web once per day each. Are these spells worth the opportunity cost?
Well, dimension door is an easy call: It’s the exit strategy. Arrive via Stealth; depart via magic. I assume that the Heralds of Dust have all sorts of dingy underground chambers to stage their attacks from, that their remnants know exactly where these chambers are and that they can dimension door directly to them just by visualizing them. (Hang on: Wouldn’t Heralds of Dust always fight to the death, given that they believe they’re dead already and are always quite pleased to die even more? Erm … I don’t have an easy answer to that. Maybe they think they move on to the next stage of death only if they die the right way, and getting cacked in combat isn’t it. If they believe they need to remain in their current form is necessary for them to serve the agenda of their faction, Heralds of Dust remnants might deem it prudent to withdraw when seriously wounded, i.e., reduced to 18 hp or fewer. I’d say “when moderately wounded,” but remnants strike me as having a bit of a zealous streak, and thus being willing to stick it out longer.)
However, both bane and web require concentration, and those conflict with remnants’ Phase bonus action, which gives them resistance to physical damage (not just from nonmagical weapons—all physical damage). At first I mistakenly read this bonus action as giving them this benefit between turns, but it’s actually on continuously, unless and until their concentration is broken—and if that happens, they can re-up it once. So the opportunity cost of bane or web isn’t only the damage given up; it’s also the damage resistance given up.
Because of this opportunity cost, one Heralds of Dust remnant fighting alone won’t use these spells, at least as long as it still has a use of Phase available. Once both of those are used up, maybe then it will consider tossing out web—although at that point, most of the value of that spell will have been squandered. Web is a spell that increases in value the longer it’s active: The more an attacker gets to roll with advantage, and the more disadvantage is imposed on the defender’s rolls, the better. In the same vein, bane is more valuable the more rolls it drags down. Probably, once it can no longer Phase, a Heralds of Dust remnant should take that as its cue to dimension door out.
However, if several remnants are attacking as a group, might it be worthwhile for one of them to cast web to increase the likelihood that the others’ Necrotic Surges will land? Having advantage on attack rolls increases hit probability by approximately 20 percentage points, which in this case amounts to an expected extra 2.8 damage on each attack. Across x attackers making two attacks each, that’s 5.6x more expected damage. To exceed the caster’s own expected damage, that total has to exceed 28 times their chance to hit. For instance, against a typical average low-level Armor Class of 15, a remnant has a 55 percent chance to hit, and 28 × 0.55 = 15.4. Dividing that by 5.6 gives 2.75, meaning that a remnant has to have at least three allies who can benefit from web to make it worth casting. With Intelligence 17, Heralds of Dust remnants can make this sort of calculation intuitively. Of course, the caster, after casting the spell, needs to stay 40 to 60 feet away from their targets, preferably behind cover, to keep the spell active and compensate for their own inability to Phase. (The fact that nearly all these hypothetical combat encounters take place in the middle of the densely populated city of Sigil, where all these factions operate and have agents in the streets, makes me think that they must turn into wild, multilateral fracases at the drop of a hat, as more and more not-so-innocent bystanders intervene.)
Finally, we have Mind’s Eye matter smiths, agents of a faction whose members are committed so strongly to self-improvement, they believe they can elevate themselves to godhood—and beyond. Here we have another instance of a fundamentally inward-looking faction, about whom we have to ask, what sort of goals could they possibly have that would require them to have agents? The best explanation I can come up with is that there do exist other factions whose own goals interfere with their desire to be left alone so that they can focus on being better, and they need to have some way of opposing that interference.
Mind’s Eye matter smiths have a very flat ability contour, excelling only in Charisma and falling short only in Strength. So, again, we’re looking at spellcasters indifferent to how far away their opponents are—and, again, with a basic spell attack that can be either melee or ranged, as the situation calls for. That attack, Manifested Force, deals an average of 10 damage on a hit, setting this as the baseline for calculating the opportunity cost of casting a spell. However, the matter smith’s once-per-day spells, create food and water and fabricate, have no combat application (you can’t, for instance, create 45 pounds of food and 30 gallons of water over an enemy’s head), so this calculation doesn’t apply. As with Heralds of Dust remnants, Mind’s Eye matter smiths can be assumed in most cases to have prudently cast mage armor before combat begins.
Aside from the Multiattack (useful in combat) and Spellcasting (not useful in combat) actions, Mind’s Eye matter smiths have the bonus action Planar Smithing, which offers a choice of two effects, one offensive, one defensive. It’s kind of boring—offensive tactical combinations are always lots of fun—but the smart play is to use the defensive Magic Shield option every time, for the simple reason that it always works, whereas the low DC of Chains means it’s likely to fail at least 45 percent of the time. In nine years, I’ve never seen a single fifth edition Dungeons & Dragons player dump Dex. Strength, Intelligence, Charisma, Wisdom, even Constitution, yes; Dexterity, never.
That being said, by increasing the matter smith’s AC, Magic Shield defends only against incoming weapon and spell attacks, not against effects that require a saving throw to resist. But being restrained doesn’t do anything to prevent an opponent from creating one of these effects, either. It does, at least, pin that opponent down so that they’re easier to blast away at with Manifested Force, or for an ally to attack using their own action, hopefully dissuading the opponent from engaging in further such shenanigans. Again, however, if they make their saving throw … *shrug*.
Mind’s Eye matter smiths choose their battles carefully, don’t start fights they can’t win and don’t attack without a plan. After one round of combat, or with advance intelligence, they can figure out which enemy or enemies it’s most important for them to eliminate first, and they focus their attacks accordingly, especially if they’re working with allies.
One of the things about being fanatically committed to self-improvement is that it’s all for naught if the self no longer exists, so Mind’s Eye matter smiths have a highly developed sense of self-preservation, withdrawing from combat when moderately wounded (reduced to 54 hp or fewer). They have the smarts to use the Disengage action when necessary, but otherwise, they Dash.
Next: Athar nulls, Fated shakers, and Doomguard rot blades and doom lords.
