## Star Spawn Emissary Tactics


If you’re running a “battle against the star spawn” campaign, your roster of antagonists no longer has to top out at the star spawn larva mage. There’s a bigger boss now: the star spawn emissary.
The name is misleading, probably intentionally so. “Emissary” has nice, diplomatic connotations. An emissary is someone sent to convey a message, right? In this case, unfortunately, the message is, “Your reality is doomed.”
When an emissary arrives, it does so in the form of a lesser star spawn emissary, and it goes about in disguise as a Small or Medium creature—generally a humanoid, but it could just as easily take the form of a friendly dog, a magic sword (constructs are creatures!) or even a deva. It reveals its true nature only when its alien masters’ reality-altering scheme is either discovered prematurely or too far along to stop.

Its Change Shape is the old-school form of the ability, requiring a full action to execute, which means it’s how the combat encounter is going to kick off; the emissary won’t get to use its Multiattack in its surprise round. However, the act of revealing its true shape probably will be something of a surprise to everyone present, so handle it like this: Everyone rolls initiative. Determine who’s surprised by the transformation. Anyone who’s not surprised and rolls higher than the emissary gets to take their turn as normal—but the emissary also gets to take a legendary action at the end of their turn! The emissary Changes Shape on its own turn, then anyone who’s not surprised and rolled lower than the emissary takes their turn, and the emissary gets a legendary action at the end of it. Starting at the top of the following round, no one’s surprised anymore, and combat unfolds in the usual fashion.
Alternatively, if you really want to get that shock-and-awe Multiattack, the Change Shape action explicitly stipulates that the emissary’s stats, other than its size, are the same regardless of its form. So that seemingly friendly dog can, if you choose, bark out Psychic Orbs or extend a pharyngeal jaw to bite someone across the room. Just be mindful that the emissary will be stuck in this form until it’s destroyed, unless it wants to forgo three attacks for the sake of showing you its true inner beauty, which it doesn’t.
The emissary possesses extraordinary ability scores across the board (except for its Dexterity, which is merely exceptional), but the peak of its ability contour is in Intelligence, indicating that, all other things being equal, it prefers to make mental attacks (Psychic Orb, Psychic Lash) over physical attacks (Lashing Maw). However, the fact that its Constitution is higher than its Dexterity implies that it doesn’t want to be too far from its foes; it’s willing to absorb attacks rather than make a great effort to avoid them, but not at the price of disadvantage on its ranged Psychic Orb attack. Conveniently, its Lashing Maw melee attack has a 15-foot reach, so it can attack without moving too close. Its preferred distance from its nearest foe is therefore 15 feet. Also conveniently, it can fly, so it stays in the air between turns. Ten feet up and 10 feet away—a hypotenuse distance of 14 feet—is a good place for the emissary to be.
Lobbing Psychic Orbs may feel better to the emissary than chomping down with a Lashing Maw, but the melee attack deals more expected damage: versus AC 18, a reasonable party average at the highest levels, Lashing Maw’s combination of piercing and acid damage deals an expected 20 damage, whereas Psychic Orb deals only an expected 14. Who, though, poses the greatest threat to the emissary? Not the ground-pounding front-line warriors whose weapons don’t reach the floating weirdie. Not the bard: The lesser star spawn emissary is immune to being charmed and frightened and has great saving throw modifiers against anything mental. Probably not the rogue, who’ll have a hard time dealing Sneak Attack damage when they have no ally within 5 feet of the emissary and its truesight defeats darkness and invisibility. Also, the emissary’s Armor Class is pretty good—not world-class, but better than plate armor alone.
No, the No. 1 threat to the emissary is the wizard, the sorcerer, the warlock—the one lobbing evocation spells from a safe distance, spells that deal fire or lightning or cold damage and require Constitution or, especially, Dexterity saving throws to resist. These physical saving throws are the ones the emissary isn’t proficient in. They’ll chip down its Legendary Resistance quickly if prompt action isn’t taken to prevent them—and they’re not going to have the decency to stay in melee reach. Best to pelt these foes with Psychic Orbs and take them out of the fight as quickly as possible. (A cleric who deals radiant damage at a distance is also a concern.) Attackers with ranged weapons are a secondary concern, seizing the emissary’s attention only if they somehow manage to deal significantly more damage than the spellslingers.
In between turns, the emissary can spend legendary actions and continue to lob Psychic Orbs at its high-priority targets. Teleportation Maw, which costs 2 legendary actions, is primarily for evading melee attackers who get too close (which generally requires them to be able to fly), but it’s also useful for making a shocking blitz attack against a spellslinger who makes the mistake of getting closer than 45 feet from the emissary.
Such a foe is unlikely ever to make the mistake of getting closer than 30 feet away, though, so Psychic Lash—a nuclear option that deals twice the damage of Psychic Orb and imposes the stunned condition if the target fails their save—isn’t optimal against them. It’s especially suboptimal against a cleric, who’ll have not only high Wisdom to begin with but also proficiency in Wisdom saves. And this ability isn’t one of those that deals half damage on a successful save; it’s all-or-nothing. So the emissary isn’t going to waste all its legendary actions using it against a target who might resist it. Instead, it uses Psychic Lash only on targets with Wisdom save mods of +6 or lower—ideally, +2 or lower. But even that isn’t quite enough: The target also has to be within 30 feet, which most likely means a target who’s trying to get right in the emissary’s face, and has to possess damage-dealing potential serious enough to merit giving up three Psychic Orb attacks to prevent it. That means a warrior, probably with a magic weapon, who deals (or could deal) 54 damage or more in a single turn. As the Dungeon Master, you can and should study your PCs’ character sheets in advance of the session and determine who meets these criteria. Their capabilities are an open book to the emissary, with its Intelligence of 25.
The lesser star spawn emissary fights until it’s destroyed, because it isn’t actually destroyed: It dissolves into goo, and then the goo re-forms and comes back even stronger, as a greater star spawn emissary. In this form, the emissary has roughly the same ability contour as it does in its lesser form, the only differences being of degree: Its Dexterity is much lower, and all its other abilities are higher. It gains proficiency in Con saves, but its Armor Class is significantly reduced, so it doesn’t have the luxury of devoting its full attention to shorting out the brain of Morgana McFireball; it has to pay more attention to melee opponents, too.
Fortunately, it now has another weapon in its arsenal: Unearthly Bile, a recharge ability that deals huge acid damage over a huge area and creates gibbering mouthers. It’s too good not to use whenever it’s available, but the more targets the emissary can include in the area of effect (preferably at least six, or all of its opponents, whichever is less), the better, because more targets means more saves, and more saves means more failed saves, and more failed saves means more gibbering mouthers. Ideally, the emissary would like to include both enemy spellslingers and enemy front-liners in this giant, corrosive gall-ball. The emissary needs to be careful not to include itself in the area of effect, though, because it’s not exempt from the damage of Unearthly Bile, and Dex saves are its No. 1 weakness. Adding one more gibbering mouther to the pile is not worth taking this much damage for. If it has to choose between drenching the spellslingers or the front-liners, it picks whichever of these two groups has the worse Dex saves, not concerning itself unduly with other opponents.
When it comes to the greater star spawn emissary’s Multiattack, it makes a similar calculation, but in this case, it focuses on Armor Class. Most of the time, this criterion means chucking Psychic Orbs at the spellslingers, but once they’re taken care of, the emissary switches its attention to the front-liners.
The greater star spawn emissary’s legendary actions differ from those of the lesser emissary. In lieu of Psychic Orb, it has Attack, which lets it attack with either Psychic Orb or Lashing Maw and includes short-range teleportation. The emissary pays attention to the initiative order and stays one step ahead of its foes, teleporting away from any melee opponent who’s about to attack—unless it can’t get far enough away to keep them from closing the distance with their own movement and then attacking, in which case there’s no point in trying. Warp Space, which costs 2 legendary actions, is good against monks, rangers, rogues and other skirmisher types; the damage is nice, but the slowing effect of the difficult terrain is the main benefit.
Mind Cloud costs 3 legendary actions and is only effective within 30 feet of the emissary, so it’s mainly for use against front-liners and their supporters. Like Psychic Lash, it targets Wisdom, so forget about using it to hurt a cleric or druid—but it’s mighty handy for taking down their spells. Per the Targets in Area of Effect Table in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide, a spherical area of effect with a 30-foot radius can be expected to affect six targets, and in a battle against high-level PCs of a variety of classes, you’re never going to have that many of them that close to a boss foe. The spellslingers and marksmen know to keep their distance. However, if you count a spell as a target, now you have a criterion for using this legendary action that begins to make some sense. Total up the number of foes within 30 feet, not counting foes with Wisdom save modifiers of +8 or more, plus the number of buff spells on them (if a spell buffs more than one target, count each buffed target as a separate spell) and the number of debuff spells on the emissary. If the sum is six or more, it’s a good time for a Mind Cloud.
While the greater star spawn emissary clearly has more than enough Wisdom to see the value in preserving its own life, it’s an alien intelligence with a mission, which I have a hard time imagining it retreating from. Plus, after fighting this thing to the death once only to have it come back even stronger, your players are not going to let this thing float away. Give them the satisfaction of slaying it once and for all.
Finally, note that the lesser and greater forms of the star spawn emissary are, in effect, two monsters that have to be fought in succession, albeit only one at a time. Together, they constitute a single CR 23 monster, worth 55,000 XP—a Hard encounter for four level 16–18 PCs or five level 14–16 PCs, and a Deadly encounter for PCs of a lower level than that. (I’m assuming that the gibbering mouthers have been figured into the CR of the greater star spawn emissary already.)
Next: relentless killers.
