## Archon Tactics


Archons are angels-but-not-angels, lawful good celestial guardians divorced from Christian iconography (and clear precursors to the “ardlings” that appeared briefly as a playable species in the OneD&D Unearthed Arcana). Morte’s Planar Bestiary presents three: the lantern archon, the hound archon and the warden archon. “When pushed into combat, they prefer to subdue foes,” the flavor text asserts—a position consistent with my own regarding angels. However, it’s important to remember that only melee attacks can reduce opponents to 0 hp without either killing them or triggering death saving throws. That was an issue for the solar; it’s also an issue for lantern archons.
Lantern archons are celestial greeters and tour guides that can somehow detect “ill intentions” despite lacking both Insight proficiency and Intelligence greater than that of a chimp. They can cast detect evil and good at will, but in fifth edition Dungeons & Dragons, that doesn’t disclose intentions or even alignment, only creature type.* I guess it’s just an innate power that lantern archons have, then, but if that’s the case, it really should be written up as a trait.
With Dexterity as the only peak in their ability contour and Strength as a deep trough, lantern archons seem tailor-made to keep their distance and snipe at their foes with Radiant Strike. Remember, though, that if they want to knock an opponent out rather than kill them, they have to restrict themselves to melee attacks. Fortunately for them, they’re resistant to physical damage from nonmagical attacks, but even so, I don’t think a single lantern archon trying to subdue a non-fiendish miscreant would ever go it alone. It would cry for backup, with the goal of outnumbering troublemakers three to one, and only zoom in for the subdual once it can do so in force.

To support them further in melee combat, lantern archons have Aura of Menace, which can impose the frightened condition on several creatures within a 20-foot radius. But with a saving throw DC of only 11, that aura has all the menace of a cute bat shrieking, “No! Stop touching me! I am the night!” Unless they’ve dumped Wisdom, even a level 1 or level 2 PC has at least a 50/50 chance of succeeding on that save. Aura of Menace’s only saving grace is that it doesn’t consume any of a lantern archon’s action economy. When it works, it just works—but it works less than half the time. Consider it a nice treat if and when an opponent fails the save.
When trying to deal with a trespasser with greater finality, lantern archons have neither the need nor the inclination to stay close. Their Multiattack lets them substitute a Teleport action for one of their attacks, so they can relocate themselves 60 feet away and zap their foes with Radiant Strike from afar. Of course, as zippy as they are, they also have the option of simply flying 60 feet, then attacking twice, but this method provokes an opportunity attack. Might they ever do it anyway? Maybe. Their Armor Class is nothing special, but their damage resistance means that even a successful opportunity attack by a foe with no magical attack will deal only half damage.
Suppose, for whatever reason, there arrived upon Mount Celestia a creature that (a) the lantern archon community decided it was necessary to murderize and (b) happened to be able to reach more than one lantern archon with its melee attacks. In that highly specific case, a lantern archon might fly out of its reach with the intention of baiting out an opportunity attack, causing the creature to use its reaction and thereby enabling other lantern archons to fly out of its reach without provoking OAs. However, if there’s no need to bait out an OA, there’s no reason for a lantern archon to provoke it. As long as it can keep its distance, it can take its time.
Once per day, a lantern archon can cast aid. I suppose, if they were anticipating a difficult fight against an obstreperous opponent, that one lantern archon might cast aid upon itself and two of its allies before going in so that they could triple-team their foe more effectively. More likely, though, I think aid is a boon granted to PCs so that they might confront enemies of Mount Celestia more effectively.
These selfless critters do their duty even if it means laying down their lives. No amount of damage will induce them to flee. That raises the question of what they need Incorporeal Movement for, and the answer is, to pursue an evil creature that tries to hide behind a locked door.
Guardians and defenders, hound archons use the Change Shape action to abide in humanoid communities, disguised as heckin’ good doggos. While in canine form, they can’t make Shining Blade attacks but otherwise possess all their other abilities. Since they can knock opponents prone with their Bite attack but not with Shining Blade, is that a tradeoff they should be content to make? Close, but not quite.
According to a fascinating analysis by Tom E. Dunn that was recently brought to my attention, the value of the prone condition equals an approximately 37 percent increase in damage to the prone target. Bite deals 7.5 damage on average; increasing that by 37 percent yields 10.275 damage, a bit shy of the average 11 damage that a hit with Shining Blade deals. But there’s also the fact that Bite has only a chance of imposing the prone condition; it’s not automatic. Supposing that the target has a +1 Strength save modifier—an improbably low value for an enthusiastic melee combatant—they’ll have a 40 percent chance of succeeding on that save, meaning that the subsequent expected damage increase is more like 22 percent (9.165 damage). The better the Strength save mod, the lower the damage increase. Change Shape takes only a bonus action, so when it’s time for a hound archon to Bite, it’s also time to drop the act and assume its true form.
Hound archons have exceptional Strength and high Constitution; their Wisdom and Charisma are high as well, but not so high as to challenge Strength as offensive abilities. Thus, these celestial creatures are bold brutes that prefer melee engagement. They have proficiency in Stealth and double proficiency in Perception, enabling them to pull off a solid ambush if they so choose, and unlike lantern archons, they do have proficiency in Insight, filling in where detect good and evil might come up short. Nonmagical weapons inflict normal damage upon them, as do all other types of damage except lightning, to which they’re immune—but none of that matters much with respect to their choice of targets, which is determined by behavior, not combat capabilities. They protec, they attac, they have your bac.
Lantern archons use the Teleport action as part of their Multiattack to retreat to a safe distance and attack from range. Hound archons use the Teleport action to close with targets that are between 80 and 160 feet away—that is, those they can’t reach using just their movement, or their movement plus a Dash action. (Yes, I said “160 feet,” not 120, because they can both Teleport and move.) Placing themselves right next to a foe like that may draw attacks, but it’s in the nature of a hound archon to draw attacks so that the opponent doesn’t attack someone else. And if it turns out that the opponent would rather not be quite so close, the hound archon will get an opportunity attack when the opponent tries to move away.
Most turns, a hound archon will make a mixed Multiattack, one Bite, one Shining Blade. Bite always comes first, for the chance of knocking the enemy prone and thereby granting advantage on the follow-up Blade attack. There’s also aid, which hound archons use to bolster others rather than themselves, and there’s continual flame, which is largely a ribbon ability; it won’t cut through a darkness spell. With a save DC only one point higher than the lantern archon’s, the hound archon’s Aura of Menace is nearly as likely to make a target go “Who’sagoodboy?” as it is to make them quake in fear. Again, be grateful when it works, and don’t sweat it when it doesn’t. It was never all that likely to have an effect anyway.
Ever dutiful, hound archons fight to the death. Ever lawful good, they attack to knock out rather than to kill, unless they’re fighting fiends or undead.
Warden archons have a lot of similarities to hound archons, although they make no effort to disguise themselves. Each one is the guardian of a particular planar portal, aware of every being that passes through in either direction. They possess extraordinary Strength, exceptional Wisdom and Charisma, very high Constitution and high Intelligence, along with proficiency in Athletics and double proficiency in Perception—but not proficiency in Insight. I suppose it doesn’t take a great deal of discernment to recognize when someone comes through the door who’s Not on the List. It’s more important to be able to detect when an invisible interloper is trying to slip through and not to lose track of them, and for that, warden archons are decently equipped.
Positioning is important for warden archons. No creature should be able to come through a portal without passing within 10 feet of its warden archon, but also, no creature should be able to get past the warden archon and through the portal without leaving the warden archon’s reach. That means there should be exactly 11¼ feet of space between the warden archon and the center of the portal, so that not even a Tiny creature can slip through the net. (It also means that the portal can be no larger than Large; Huge creatures will have to squeeze through, and Gargantuan creatures will have to find another way across. Either that, or a portal will need two warden archons to guard its full breadth.) Thanks to the warden archon’s 30 feet of truesight (on top of 120 feet of darkvision), the only way to get by it undetected is to stop time.
Sneaks must also pass through its Aura of Menace, which has somewhat more oomph than those of the lantern and hound archon: A target with a +1 Wisdom save modifier will fail 65 percent of the time. PCs with pumped-up Dexterity and Wisdom are in the minority, and no PC is proficient in both saves unless they’ve taken the Resilient feat. Imposing the frightened condition is more useful against folks trying to run the barricade from the archon’s side of the portal than those trying to run it from the other side, since on the archon’s side, getting closer to the portal necessarily means getting closer to the archon, whereas it’s not crystal-clear that the aura reaches through a portal to affect targets before they cross the threshold. However, another aspect of the frightened condition, disadvantage on ability checks, is all-important: It means that if the warden archon nabs a trespasser with a Claw attack, they’re hindered on an already difficult roll to escape.
When someone tries to make use of a portal without authorization, the warden archon either Multiattacks or makes a Claw opportunity attack the first moment it can. A hit automatically grapples the target, and once the warden archon has a creature grappled, it doesn’t let go without a darn good explanation of what that creature is up to.
The warden archon has a weakness, though: It can grapple only one creature at a time. If more than one creature crashes the gate, it can’t stop them all. It’s very smart and is well aware of this problem, so if its hands are full with one miscreant, it tries to use its Tracker’s Bite against a different miscreant; it can always use that ability against the one it’s holding on its next turn, since chances are slim that they’ll get away.
But there’s another option, one not described in the stat block. If you hire someone to guard a door, you’re going to give them the keys, right? If a warden archon is aware that there’s even the slightest chance that it’s about to get blitzed, it forgoes attacking and uses its action to shut down the portal. Per Sigil and the Outlands (chapter 2, “Portals”): “Most portals aren’t always open. Instead, they open at certain times, when a particular condition is met, in response to a command word or phrase, or when a traveler is holding a particular object called a portal key.” No one goes in or out without the warden archon’s say-so, and if that means no one goes in or out at all, so be it. Proper procedure must be followed.
The warden archon is limited in its movement because of its sacred duty to guard its portal, so unless the portal is shut down, it can’t abandon its position. After shutting down the portal, however, a warden archon is free to move around as needed to subdue its foes or, at a minimum, attempt to strike each one with a Tracker’s Bite before they can skedaddle. Unlike lantern archons and hound archons, warden archons target clerics, druids and bards first. It’s nothing personal, and certainly not what they’d prefer; they just can’t have someone yelling out healing words left and right, waking up the opponents they’ve gone to the trouble of knocking unconscious. Paladins come next, with full sorrowful “I’m sorry I have to do this—it hurts me more than it hurts you” energy.
If it lands hits with all three attacks, a warden archon’s full Multiattack can reasonably expected to knock out most PCs of level 4 or lower in a single turn. However, if you’re trying to build balanced encounters, you probably won’t send your PCs to confront a warden archon until they’re level 5 to 8, which is going to make it a whole lot harder for it to fend them off. Its Intelligence is high but not uncanny, so it can assess risk only on the basis of what it can observe directly; its exceptional Wisdom, however, gives it a keen intuition for whether a group of travelers is going to give it more trouble than it can handle. When its opponents outmatch it, it tries to talk its way to an appropriate resolution of the situation as long as it’s allowed any chance to do so—even if it’s already been forced to snatch someone who thought they could just dart by.
Of course, if it sees a fiend or an undead approaching, it knows that negotiation isn’t going to reach an agreement that serves the interests of both sides. It casts protection from evil and good, hits the kill switch on the portal and hunkers down for a rumble.
Although they’ll call for a peaceful discussion to their last breath, warden archons never withdraw from a fight.
Next: guardinals.

* Man, I hate to be That Guy, but at this point I think I have “That Guy” tattooed across my forehead. In past editions, detect evil warned you if a creature (or even an object) was evil-aligned. In 5E, it only tells you a creature’s type. Which isn’t a problem, necessarily, as long as you can safely assume that celestials are good, fiends are evil, fey are chaotic and so forth. But now we’ve moved into the era in which celestials are only typically good, fiends are only typically evil, etc. So now detect evil and good tells you that Bein-Asmasioth is a celestial, but it doesn’t tell you anything about his intentions or sympathies, and maybe you’ve just played yourself because you jumped to the conclusion that Bein-Asmasioth was good when he’s actually evil. If you can’t count on certain types of creatures’ being of certain alignments, then maybe detect evil and good should actually tell you whether a creature is good or evil, shouldn’t it?
