## Feyr Tactics


So I read the feyr stat block in Boo’s Astral Menagerie, formed a quick notion of how it ought to be played, then read the flavor text and found it to be largely a summation of what I’d just concluded. Long story short, the feyr isn’t a monster or even a hazard, really. It’s just a jerk move to pull on your players, and one that may not even accomplish that much.
Feyrs are large, hovering aberrations that don’t require air, suggesting that they’re native to Wildspace, although they might be found anywhere (the flavor text suggests “dark alleys and dungeons”). With very high Strength and Dexterity, proficiency in Perception, and expertise in Stealth, they’re shock attackers that ambush their prey. Their 120 feet of darkvision suits them well to sneaking up on spacefaring ships but also to the Underdark.
Their offensive actions include Invisibility (just what it says on the box), a Multiattack comprising a Frightful Bite attack and a Tentacle attack, and the once-per-day Nightmare Fuel ability. Examining these attacks more closely:

A hit with Frightful Bite imposes the frightened condition on a failed Wisdom saving throw.
A hit with Tentacle imposes the grappled condition.
A failed Wisdom save against Nightmare Fuel deals a whopping amount of psychic damage and bolsters the feyr with a whole mess of temporary hit points as well. However, its use is limited to unconscious targets.


There are therefore two paths to taking the Nightmare Fuel action: Either the feyr first batters its target down to 0 hp, or it sneaks up on a target who’s asleep and sucker-punches them. Thing is, the feyr only gets one shot at it. If it blows its chance, it’s not going to get another. Thus, sneaking up on a sleeping target makes way more sense. Plus, the feyr’s Intelligence and Wisdom are both high, implying that it chooses its battles carefully, can assess its enemies’ weaknesses accurately, targets accordingly and doesn’t stay in a fight it can’t easily win. Finally, its combat role—shock attacker—means it takes a dim view of protracted combat. It wants to hit and run. These additional givens reinforce the strategy of targeting sleeping victims, and lo and behold, that’s precisely what the flavor text recommends.
However, there’s something else to consider: that weaksauce Wisdom saving throw DC. The feyr is CR 5, meaning that you’re probably not chucking it at player characters below level 4—but level 4 is when PCs get their first ability score increases, should they choose to accept them. Granted, players usually use their ASIs to improve their primary ability scores rather than to shore up their dump stats. But even so, a creature with a power it can use only once per day isn’t going to want to waste it against someone it has less than a two-thirds chance of affecting. Anyone with a saving throw modifier of −1 or greater can beat DC 13 at least a third of the time—yet −1 is the lowest save mod that any PC is likely to have. That’s a dump stat save mod. That’s the dump stat save mod, unless you’ve let your players roll for their stats and they’ve gotten a 7 or lower in something.
In other words, the most likely outcome of a feyr encounter is that it sleazes its way aboard the PCs’ spelljamming vessel (or into their camp) under cover of invisibility, sniffs around at everyone’s theta waves, judges that its odds aren’t good enough and leaves, and no one is the wiser.
All right, but suppose it stumbles upon Buttercup the Bard, whose Wisdom save modifier happens to be −2. That’s bad enough—barely—for the feyr to decide to feast on his bad dreams, so it cruises up to a 10-foot distance (no sense getting within melee reach when you don’t have to) and unleashes its Nightmare Fuel. If Buttercup is level 4 or higher, citing Mike “Sly Flourish” Shea’s median PC hit point table again, it’s going to take at least 31 damage to drive him down to where he’s making death saves (the likelihood that his player dumped both Wisdom and Constitution is near zero), and two-thirds of the time, Nightmare Fuel deals 30 or less, so Buttercup most likely wakes up screaming. That’s the feyr’s cue to depart. If Buttercup succeeds on his save and Nightmare Fuel fails? That’s also the feyr’s cue to depart. And if Nightmare Fuel deals more damage than Buttercup has hit points? Well, what does the feyr need to stick around for? It got what it came for, and it can’t use that action twice.
What does the feyr need Frightful Bite and Tentacle for, then? Looking at these abilities in isolation, they appear to be intended to set up Nightmare Fuel by immobilizing a creature and hindering its ability to fight back until it can be rendered unconscious. As we’ve noted, though, this approach is needlessly risky and time-consuming compared with simply searching out targets who are unconscious already. Against those targets, the feyr doesn’t reveal itself until it’s ready to use Nightmare Fuel, and afterward, it has no reason to stay. It might be different if the feyr were more stupid or foolish, but it’s got sense in its bulbous head.
However, there is one situation in which it might want to use its Multiattack, and that’s if there’s someone else in the next bed who’ll wake up and take action if Buttercup starts screaming. In that case, it may make some sense for the feyr to immobilize and hinder them. The feyr can’t use both Nightmare Fuel and Multiattack at the same time, and either one will wake its target up if it doesn’t take them down, but the fact that attacks against unconscious characters from within 5 feet of them have advantage and deal critical hits changes the calculus. Normal hits with Frightful Bite and Tentacle together will deal at least 24 damage at least two-thirds of the time, assuming they both hit (a safe assumption when the target is asleep—unlike its save DCs, the feyr’s attack bonuses aren’t shabby), but crits with those attacks have a two-thirds chance of dealing at least 42 damage. According to Sly’s calculations, that’s enough to neutralize almost any level 4 PC, at least half of all level 5 PCs and the frailest fourth of level 6 PCs. This maneuver ceases to make sense if the characters are higher-level or have more hit points, or if there’s a third person who might wake up and react.
With its brisk 50-foot flying speed, the feyr’s most sensible withdrawal action is to Disengage if it’s within melee reach of at least one enemy who can see it. If its foe(s) can’t see it, or if it’s not within their reach, it Dashes.
Next: eye mongers.
