## Making Enemies, Available for Preorder


As roleplaying gamers, we make up stories—and as gamemasters, we select many of the elements out of which these stories are made. We come up with a theme, we set the scenes and the mood, we populate the world, and perhaps most important of all, we create the antagonists against which the player characters must struggle. We decide how powerful they’ll be, what motivates them, how they can be overcome, and what effects victory and defeat will have upon the world around them.
For this purpose, the games we play provide an abundance of fantastic and horrific creatures that can fill the antagonist role, from mindless to hyperintelligent, laughably hapless to devastating, indifferent or oblivious to single-mindedly malicious. There are so many choices, in fact, that it can sometimes be hard to find the right one among them.
And yet sometimes, despite having all these choices, we find that none of them is quite right for the particular story we want to tell. In which case, we have to invent monsters of our own.

In The Monsters Know What They’re Doing, the essential tactics guide for Dungeon Masters, and its sequel, MOAR! Monsters Know What They’re Doing, I reverse-engineered hundreds of fifth edition Dungeons & Dragons monsters to help DMs prepare battle plans for combat encounters before their game sessions. Now, in Making Enemies—coming Oct. 7 from Saga Press—I explore everything that goes into creating monsters from the ground up:

Size, number, and level of challenge
Monster habitats
Monster motivations
Monsters as metaphors
Monsters and magic
The monstrous anatomy possessed by real-world organisms
How to customize monsters for your own tabletop roleplaying game adventuring party to confront 

No longer limited to one game system, Making Enemies shows you how to build out your creations not just for D&D 5E but also for Pathfinder 2E, Shadowdark, the Cypher System, and Call of Cthulhu 7E. Including interviews with some of the most brilliant names in RPG and creature design, Making Enemies gives you the tools to surprise and delight your players—and terrify their characters—again and again.
Click here to preorder today from your favorite independent bookseller, or follow one of these links:
BookshopAmazonBarnes & NobleIndigoKoboGoogle PlayApple Books
If you’d prefer to support your friendly local game store with your purchase, ask the buyer to contact Simon & Schuster Distribution or ACD Distribution to order wholesale.

