## Dragon Turtles Revisited

If you’ve got a campaign that takes place largely or entirely at sea, maybe dragon turtles figure in it more prominently than your garden-variety dragons—and maybe you’re disappointed to have only the one dragon turtle stat block to work with.[*] Worry no longer, says Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons, which expands the dragon turtle family tree to include all the same stages of development that the Monster Manual provides for chromatic and metallic dragons: wyrmlings, young and ancient as well as adult.
The dragon turtle extended family parallels the dragon turtle family in a lot of ways. Since the default (adult) dragon turtle is already Gargantuan, however, the younger variations are also both one size larger than their dragon analogues. (The ancient dragon turtle remains Gargantuan: you can’t get more gargantuan than Gargantuan.)
Dragon turtle wyrmlings, like other wyrmlings, are a little slower than their elders, a couple of points less well-armored, lower in their ability scores but with a matching contour, conversant only in Draconic, and restricted to a single Bite attack and a breath weapon with a 15-foot range. Mainly a threat to fisherfolk and interinsular traders and explorers, dragon turtle wyrmlings haven’t yet hit upon the idea of extortion; they attack simply to eat and thus behave more like bog-standard ambush predators, although they lack Stealth and can conceal themselves only by staying underwater. If a blast of their Steam Breath against two or more targets brings at least one of them down, they try to gobble that target up. If not, they Bite the most wounded one until they take enough damage to moderately wound it (reduce it to 63 hp or fewer), then submerge and swim away.
Similarly, young dragon turtles match their elders in speed, fall one point short in Armor Class, and have a Claw/Claw/Bite Multiattack and a 30-foot breath weapon; however, while their Strength and Constitution will continue to increase, their Dexterity and mental ability scores are already as high as they’re ever going to get, unless they live to the ripest of old ages. They’re old enough to begin to grasp the notion of Nice Things and Wanting Them, as well as to develop an awareness of territory and a desire to control it. Characters who can communicate with them find them to be bossy and boastful, making big promises and demanding displays of deference from those who pass through their pelagic precincts. They may not be able to back up their talk, but they’re egocentric and swaggering enough to try.
Young dragon turtles have more tactical savvy than dragon turtle wyrmlings. They know, for instance, to stay underwater until they’re ready to use their Steam Breath against three or more targets and then to dive again afterward. They also know, if a boat looks vulnerable enough, that its passengers will be helpless if they destroy the boat with Bite and Claw attacks first. Unlike, say, a kraken, dragon turtles—regardless of age—don’t possess the Siege Monster trait, so sinking a whole ship probably isn’t in the cards, but any given young dragon turtle may not have learned that yet. Thus, when it encounters a vessel, its first Multiattack (after it opens with its Steam Breath in round 1) will be against the hull. However, if that’s not enough to reduce the hull’s hit points by at least half, it switches to attacking just the passengers.
Like other predators, young dragon turtles prefer to attack the vulnerable, and their Steam Breath is a good way of identifying vulnerability. Thus, their first Multiattack against a living creature targets whoever took the most damage from their initial Steam Breath attack. Afterward, however, they switch to attacking whichever opponent is hurting them the most, in order to show their dominance, and they don’t duck underwater between attacks unless they’re taking damage from at least two sources. More truculent than their younger siblings, young dragon turtles don’t retreat until they’re seriously wounded (reduced to 71 hp or fewer).
Here’s one significant difference from conventional aerial dragons: Although the default (adult) dragon turtle, like adult dragons, gains a Tail attack and 60 feet of range on its breath weapon, it isn’t categorized as a legendary creature and has no legendary actions. The ancient dragon turtle makes up for that shortcoming, and then some. Although it still has no lair—dragon turtles are apparently nomadic—it does get three legendary actions. One is a straightforward extra attack; another is an extra move that skirts opportunity attacks as long as it’s entirely aquatic. (It’s easy to forget that dragon turtles can, in fact, get up on land and ruin your day there. They’re just slower there, so they prefer not to. But if they’re angered enough, anything’s possible.) The third, Boiling Aura, costs three legendary actions and makes it extremely dangerous to get within melee reach of the ancient dragon turtle. The sooner after its own turn the ancient dragon turtle can take this legendary action, the better, since Boiling Aura deals its damage at the start of the affected creatures’ turns. It doesn’t make sense to save it until only one or two opponents remain in the initiative order.
Next we come to the traits that unveil that the ancient dragon turtle is, in fact, on par with greatwyrms: Unusual Nature, Blessing of the Sea and mythic actions. Blessing of the Sea is another “Gotta kill it twice” trait (more of what my wife referred to as “███████ Dark Souls ████████”) that also unlocks mythic actions, the more salient of which is Armor of Storms. This mythic action is a nasty double whammy: Not only does it give the ancient dragon turtle 40 temporary hit points, which is a lot of temporary hit points, it also punishes any opponent who lands a melee hit against it with a retaliatory electrical jolt.
Everything we’re seeing here paints the picture of a fast-moving brute melee combatant that loves to get close to its enemies (though not too close—its shortest-range melee attack has a 10-foot reach, so it never needs to come within reach of quotidian humanoid-size melee weapons) and unload its whole arsenal of natural weapons and aura effects. The natural reaction to a behemoth like this one is to get as far away as possible and try to plink it to death from a distance, but the ancient dragon turtle has two retorts to this strategy, one obvious, one not at all obvious. The obvious one is its 60-foot swimming speed, which makes it hard to escape from. The nonobvious one is a consequence of the underwater combat rules (Player’s Handbook, chapter 9), under which ranged weapons automatically miss at long range. If combat is taking place on the surface of the water and an archer is standing on the deck of a ship, sure, they can land a hit at a respectable distance—assuming the dragon turtle is breaching. But why would it do that until it’s close enough to attack? You don’t see any dragon turtle coming, let alone an ancient one, until it’s too late to escape.
As I mentioned above, dragon turtles don’t have the Siege Monster trait, so attacking a vessel rather than the crawling creatures on board is a strategy without a lot of direct payoff. But indirect payoff, in the form of scaring the bejesus out of said crawling creatures, has its merits, and a monster as long-lived and patient as an ancient dragon turtle doesn’t mind taking seven or eight rounds to stave in the hull of a carrack. After it announces its presence with authority by leaping 12 feet in the air from the water (a “running” high jump per “Special Types of Movement,” chapter 8 of the Player’s Handbook, taking the liberty of counting swimming as running) and scalding everyone on deck with Steam Breath before landing back in the water with a colossal splash and vanishing beneath the sea-foam, the crunching slams against the side of the ship that follow as it waits for its Steam Breath to recharge should raise justified alarm. The ancient dragon turtle deviates from this strategy only if the ship’s passengers fight back with enough moxie to show that they need to be confronted directly.
An interesting thing about the ancient dragon turtle’s Multiattack is that instead of just Claw/Claw/Bite, it has the option to substitute a Tail attack for its Bite attack. Bite does more total damage, both on average and at the upper end, and it’s a mix of mundane piercing damage and Rage-bypassing lightning damage. But the Tail attack can knock target creatures prone, with a solid DC 24 to resist it—a serious number for anyone but a doughty front-liner to beat. Imposing the prone condition is something of a nothingburger for most monsters, since the target simply gets back up on their own turn, but for a monster with legendary actions it becomes a more serious threat, since it can make follow-up attacks with advantage on intervening turns, not just on its own. Thus, instead of Claw/Claw/Bite, the ancient dragon turtle can Tail/Claw/Claw, rolling with advantage on the latter two attacks after a successful knockdown, then potentially make up to three more Tail attacks, also with advantage, before the target ever has a chance to stand up again. (I could say “Claw or Tail” attacks, but given a choice between Claw and Tail, why choose Claw? Its reach is 5 feet less, it deals less damage, and it has no proning rider. When taking the legendary Attack action, always choose Tail. Even if a Claw attack makes more sense cinematically, roll for Tail, then reskin it when you describe what happens. Strangely, the ancient dragon turtle’s Tail attack deals less damage than the regular dragon turtle’s—but it still deals more than Claw.)
Steam Breath, of course, is preferred over Multiattack, both because of the area of effect and because it’s on a recharge. The 90-foot AoE indicates that the ancient dragon turtle makes a point of including all its opponents in the blast, and it positions itself wherever it must to accomplish this objective. As if its having AC 22 weren’t enough to make the point, the fact that it effectively has 759 hp plus however many temporary hit points it gets from repeated use of Armor of Storms should tell you how concerned it is about opportunity attacks.
Ancient dragon turtles gain considerable Intelligence and Wisdom in their old age, significantly more than ordinary adult dragon turtles possess. These gains give them the ability to accurately assess their enemies’ weaknesses and target them accordingly, along with the prudence to avoid battles they don’t believe they can win. The fact that they spend their entire lives in the water, however, means that they’re not likely to have much advance knowledge of their foes, so they have to acquire this intelligence by direct observation and engagement, which takes a couple of rounds—and they can be fooled by appearances.
If a party of player characters can somehow deliver at least 123 damage or more in the first round of combat, an attacking ancient dragon turtle stops in its tracks, because clearly, it’s underestimated its opponents badly. Winning is nice, but winning without risking one’s own life is best, and that kind of damage output indicates a level of risk that an ancient dragon turtle does not live to be 1,200 years old by taking on. Parley with an ancient dragon turtle is difficult: It doesn’t speak Common, only Draconic and Aquan (the water dialect of Primordial); there’s not a lot you can offer it that it wants, beyond not injuring or killing it, and it’s hard to kill; and its dominance over its aquatic home range has been so total for so long, it simply can’t let you pass through without taking something from you. Thread this needle, and it will stand down. Fail, and it will resume its attacks with greater ferocity, focusing on those who dealt that first-round damage. Like its greatwyrm kin, once it commits to the fight, it fights to the bitter end.
Next: We interrupt our coverage of Fizban’s to examine the newly released, fundament-shaking Monsters of the Multiverse.
[*] Sorry, blog readers, but my observations on dragon turtle tactics are exclusive to the print edition of The Monsters Know What They’re Doing.
