## Zakya Rakshasa Tactics

When I see the name “zakya rakshasa,” the first two questions that pop into my mind are:

What’s special about Zakya?
How is this rakshasa different from all other rakshasas?

Well, it turns out that “Zakya” isn’t a place; rather, it’s a modifier of “rakshasa,” like “gish” or “kith’rak” after “githyanki.” As for the second question, the answer is interesting, since it includes the fact that zakya rakshasas (CR 5) are significantly less powerful than the Monster Manual rakshasa (CR 13).
Described as “the bloodthirsty footsoldiers of the rakshasa horde,” zakya rakshasas are higher in Strength and Constitution and lower in all other abilities. They’re optimized for combat, with better armor, magical weapon attacks, Martial Prowess—a trait that lets them knock opponents back, knock them down or disarm them on a hit—and an improved Multiattack. But they’re also nerfed, significantly, in their deceptive abilities, on which old-school rakshasas wholly rely. More than 80 percent of their Innate Spellcasting repertoire is gone, with only detect thoughts and disguise self remaining (but shield added). Proficiencies in Deception and Insight have been replaced by Athletics and Perception, and their Limited Magic Immunity applies only to spells of 1st level or lower, which means detect evil and good is the only detection spell on whose radar the zakya rakshasa won’t make a blip.
Zakya rakshasas are even slower, with 30 feet of movement speed rather than 40 feet, and their immunity to physical damage from normal weapons has been downgraded to resistance, although they retain their vulnerability to piercing from magic weapons wielded by good creatures—a quaint vestige in an era when many Dungeons & Dragons groups are chucking alignment out the window.
In a significant sense, these are rakshasas in name only. But maybe it’s more fair to call them a reimagining of rakshasas—in which, rather than a handful of subtle schemers making trouble independently, they’re a ravaging host. (Mind you, like yeth hounds, zakya rakshasas are strictly for throwing at high-level PCs if they’re going to be present in any numbers at all. Mid-level PCs will have their hands full with just two or three at a time.)
Their altered nature simplifies their tactics significantly. Zakya rakshasas are no-nonsense brutes, hurling javelins as they charge forth into melee range, then laying into their foes with their longswords. Their detect thoughts and disguise self abilities no longer serve much purpose; shield lets them turn one  a hit against AC 18 to 23, along with any others until the start of their next turn, into a miss. The only open question is which of their three Martial Prowess options they use on any given turn.

Push 10 feet away. Unless there’s some kind of environmental hazard behind the zakya rakshasa’s enemy which it can knock them into—flames, a pit, a pit of flames, etc.—the most obvious application of this option is to obviate the need to disengage while retreating. Do zakya rakshasas even retreat? That’s a good question: They’re lawful evil, suggesting disciplined obedience, and yet the flavor text suggests that they do the bidding of demons, which are chaotic evil by nature and not known for prudently conserving resources to fight another day. It’s possible, even likely, that a demon commander would see no reason to order its troops to withdraw, ever, and zakya rakshasas would never do so without an order. However, a squad of zakya rakshasas free to exercise their own judgment concerning the best way to complete their mission might retreat if they recognized they were outmatched.
Knock prone. If a zakya rakshasa lands a hit on the first or second of its three sword attacks, this option primes the always useful combo of making follow-up attack rolls with advantage. The other two options are situational; this one is evergreen. Consider it the default.
Disarm. Good for divesting a foe of a magic weapon—or any weapon, really—especially if it’s better than the longsword that the zakya rakshasa carries. Ditto a magical object or a rope that one of the enemy’s allies is hanging from. However, before you have the zakya rakshasa snatch up its prize, take note that it’s got its hands full with a sword in one hand and a shield in the other. It has no free hand with which to pick up the dropped weapon while still holding onto its sword. The only way to swap the dropped weapon for the rakshasa’s own is for it to drop its sword—simply letting go of an object consumes no action economy—and then use its free interaction to snatch up the prize. Now, even zakya rakshasas are brighter than your average opinion columnist; if they know they’re headed into a battle in which they’re going to want to seize their enemies’ weapons, they might willingly enter battle without their shields in order to keep one hand free, in which case their Armor Class will be only 16. (On the flip side, they’ll also get to wield their versatile longswords two-handed, dealing slightly more damage.) Otherwise, if their opponent’s weapon isn’t better than the zakya rakshasa’s own sword, and if the ground is low-friction enough, the fiend uses its free interaction to simply kick the dropped weapon out of reach, forcing the opponent to either Disengage or risk an opportunity attack before running to fetch it back.

Zakya rakshasas prefer to strike at night, when their darkvision may give them an edge over their enemies. Their Intelligence and Wisdom are high enough that they plan their attacks and choose their targets carefully, ensuring that conditions are favorable to them before they strike. If they do have the discretion to decide when to retreat, they do so as a group when their enemies have forced them to transition from offense to defense and their defense is failing—a strategic judgment, not based on the current hit points of any individual rakshasa.
Next: radiant idols.
