## Living Spell Tactics

Living spells are constructs with no creator except calamity. Produced by a massive magical mishap, they’re hazards, not creatures with intention. They home in on living targets for no obvious reason except that they’re damage-dealing spells that need to deal damage to something.
Owing to this fact of their creation, there isn’t much to say about their tactics. They head toward the nearest living thing, then detonate. Until their Spell Mimicry recharges, they use their Magical Strike attacks against the same target. With their basement-level Intelligence and Wisdom, there’s no discrimination among targets and no self-preservation impulse—the latter reinforced by their being constructs. They cycle mechanistically between these actions until they’re dispersed (to say “killed” doesn’t make much sense in this instance).
However, there are a few interesting things worth noting in their entry in Eberron: Rising From the Last War. First, both their spell attack modifiers and their spell save DCs are based on their Constitution. I think this is the first and, so far, only instance I’ve seen in fifth-edition Dungeons & Dragons of Constitution being used as a primary offensive ability score. If living spells were more tactically interesting, this calculation might herald the creation of an entirely new combat role. Regrettably, as written, they’re not much more than heat-seeking land mines.
Second, there’s the question of range—specifically, at what point a creature draws their hostile interest. I think the answer is as soon as they detect it. To determine that, I’d use the Encounter Distance table on the Dungeon Master’s Screen Reincarnated (still not duplicated in any published D&D book!), with the Mournlands or comparable locations being characterized as “wastelands,” for a visual range of 2d10 × 10 feet (110 feet on average) and an audible distance of 2d6 × 10 feet (70 feet on average) for creatures making a normal amount of noise. Living spells have 60 feet of darkvision, so adjust the visual range accordingly in darkness; halve creatures’ audible distance if they’re sneaking, and multiply it by five if they’re making a racket. Since they don’t have Keen Smell, I wouldn’t include scent as a factor.
Third, the living burning hands, living lightning bolt and living cloudkill are presented as examples, and the flavor text provides a helpful formula for turning any suitable spell into a living version. Bigby’s hand, Mordenkainen’s faithful hound and shatter all strike me as interesting options from the Player’s Handbook, but the real fun comes from creating living versions of evocation and conjuration spells from Xanathar’s Guide to Everything. Imagine running into living versions of ice knife, dust devil, Melf’s minute meteors, tidal wave, sickening radiance, vitriolic sphere, immolation, steel wind strike or dawn. (Unfortunately, I found Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything to be bereft of suitable candidate spells.)
There’s also this qualification: “Living spells most often manifest from evocation and conjuration spells” (emphasis mine). While the instructions state specifically to choose a damage-dealing evocation or conjuration spell, broadening the list of acceptable spell schools introduces the possibility of a living version of blight or (from Xanathar’s) negative energy flood, both excellent candidates for a cursed land reeking with death. And imagine the bonkers energy to be gleaned from a rogue animate objects spell that brings player characters’ belongings to life! (Caveat: This stunt is funny once. Twice is once too many.)
Next: warforged titans and colossi.
