## Yes, I’m Here


Those of you who are still reading this blog, I thank you for sticking around. I’ve been AWOL for too long again, and you’re overdue for an update.
When I wrote How to Defend Your Lair, this blog went on hiatus for 13 months, something I never intended and vowed not to repeat. Oops, I did it again … although this time, at least, it’s been only four months. My plan was to get the book I’m working on now finished by Memorial Day, so that I’d be stepping away from the blog for just a couple of months. As you can surmise, that didn’t happen. I’m just now getting close to the finish line, and I think it’s still a week or two’s worth of work away—work that’s hard to get done, because this kid needs to be kept busy until school starts.
It’s been a bumpy couple of years here at Monsters Central, to be frank. I had big plans to diversify my activities in 2023 and 2024. None of them came to pass, because of a cluster bomb of disruptive events—most notably, the takeover of Twitter and the OGL fiasco—that blew apart the professional network I’d just begun to build and threw the whole tabletop roleplaying game industry into a fog of war.
In addition, some of you may have heard a rumor that Wizards of the Coast is considering releasing a revamp of fifth edition Dungeons & Dragons. A couple of readers have reached out to ask me whether I plan to update The Monsters Know What They’re Doing: Combat Tactics for Dungeon Masters to reflect changes to monsters in the new Monster Manual. The answer is, yes, I fully intend to. Not only that, I’ve wanted for a long time now to give Live to Tell the Tale: Combat Tactics for Players a thorough revision to make it a better teaching tool. The release of a new Player’s Handbook affords me the perfect opportunity to do that. Before I take that project on, though, I need to finish the book I’m writing now.

A couple of years ago, I started brainstorming ideas about fantasy monster design. You reverse-engineer enough of these things, you start to get some idea of how the engineering principles work in the forward direction. Plus, I needed something to tide me over until I could start work on revising my most popular books for 5E2E, and it seemed like a natural topic, given my stock-in-trade. My current project, therefore, is a compilation of thoughts on designing original monsters: not just my own thoughts but also those of other monster designers whom I’ve interviewed, drawing on my past experience as a journalist. In this book, I discuss both abstract principles and concrete mechanics, and in a departure from my past work, it includes specific advice not just for D&D 5E but also for Pathfinder, Shadowdark, the Cypher System and Call of Cthulhu, along with general advice that can be applied to many other systems as well. It’s the first of my books for which I haven’t been certain that the first title I came up with was the best one, so I’m holding off on announcing a title until my editor and I settle on one.
Anyway, that’s what I’ve been doing instead of writing blog posts, but I definitely do intend to get back to writing blog posts very, very soon—the last week of August, if not sooner. Thank you for your patience and continued support.
