## Razorvine Blight Tactics


The razorvine blight, like other blights from the Monster Manual, is a plant that hates everybody. Unlike those other blights, this one is multiply mobile and as speedy as the average humanoid. It can climb walls and even ceilings as well as walk, and it has the False Appearance trait, allowing it to hide and strike from unexpected places. Note that this is the Monsters of the Multiverse version of False Appearance, not the Monster Manual version: Instead of being indistinguishable from a normal plant when it doesn’t move, the razorvine blight can be spotted with a DC 18 Intelligence (Investigation) check. But at the levels where player characters will typically encounter a CR 1 blight, few PCs will be able to beat that DC with a passive check. In fact, I’m pretty sure they can’t beat it at all without either possessing the Observant trait or making an active check. (I know you’ll correct me if I’m wrong.)
Its ability contour has one peak, in Dexterity, which doubles as its primary offensive and primary defensive ability. Its Constitution isn’t far behind, and since it has a self-healing ability that makes up for its hit points’ being low for its CR, it can handle a protracted skirmish. But there’s nothing wrong with having it favor a hit-and-run approach, looking for a way out if it hasn’t already won the fight after two rounds.

Its basic attack, Claw, is a straightforward melee strike, but it has a long reach, allowing it to ambush a target from 10 feet away—convenient for a razorvine blight lurking atop a pergola. The main decision to make when running a razorvine blight, however, is when to use Life-Draining Vines, an ability that recharges only on a roll of 6. How can it make this ability count?
Well, it requires Dexterity saving throws from every creature within 10 feet, but the DC on that Dex save is low; to have any confidence that at least one target will fail it, the razorvine blight needs to hit at least two creatures with it at once, and preferably three or four. Even on a successful save, it deals nearly as much damage as a Claw attack does, but the biggest value proposition of Life-Draining Vines is that it provides healing to the razorvine blight as long as at least one of its targets fails their save. Which means that it doesn’t want to use this ability until it’s down at least as many hit points as the ability restores.
Whoever designed the razorvine blight kindly saved me the trouble of doing probability math: No matter how many targets succeed or fail on their saving throws (provided that at least one fails), Life-Draining Vines always restores exactly 9 hp. Obviously, therefore, the razorvine blight saves it until it’s been reduced to 18 hp or fewer, and it positions itself where it can affect the greatest possible number of opponents with it, in order to maximize its chances of getting the healing. If this ability should happen to recharge, it uses it again immediately unless it’s back above 18 hp, in which case it waits until it falls below again.
The razorvine blight is pretty dim, with Intelligence greater than a dog’s but less than a chimp’s. It operates purely from instinct and is indiscriminate in its target selection, although it does at least know to scramble away when it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 10 hp or fewer after using Life-Draining Vines). It is truculent enough, however, that if Life-Draining Vines happens to recharge while it’s fleeing, it may decide to come back for more.
And that concludes my review of the monsters of Planescape. Next … I haven’t made up my mind yet. Let me run and visit my Friendly Local Game Store and get back to you on that one.
