## Dragon Tactics, Part 2.6: New Lair Actions

Fizban’s Treasury of Dragons contains stat blocks for greatwyrms, gem dragons, deep dragons, sea serpents and 20-odd new dragon-adjacent creatures. On top of that, its “Draconomicon” section (chapter 5) includes new lair actions for the Monster Manual’s chromatic and metallic dragons. I’ve discussed these dragons in a previous post and in The Monsters Know What They’re Doing: Combat Tactics for Dungeon Masters, but to recap, chromatic dragons’ lair actions fall roughly into the three categories of movement restrictors, debilitators and direct damage, while most (but not all) metallic dragons’ lair actions can be divided into nonlethal “cloud actions” and more aggressive “push actions” that usually (but not always) deal damage and inhibit movement.
Since dragons can’t use the same lair action two rounds in a row, direct damage lair actions are a good fallback, as well as a way to focus down a single troublesome enemy. All the other types of lair actions are area effects that depend in part on having one’s enemies arranged conveniently enough to make them worthwhile. The metric I use for “worthwhile” is whether the number of enemies the dragon can affect with the lair action equals or exceeds the Targets in Areas of Effect table in chapter 8 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide. Healthy dragons use movement restrictors to pin down enemies before using their breath weapons against them, while badly hurt dragons use them to cover their retreat. In my earlier analyses, I stated that vision-obscuring abilities (the black dragon’s darkness, the blue dragon’s cloud of sand, the white dragon’s freezing fog) were particularly useful for shutting down spellcasters, but now that I have a greater understanding of the function of darkness, I’d argue that their side effect of nullifying advantage and disadvantage on attack rolls makes them especially potent against rogues.
Here are the lair actions that Fizban’s adds to the mix:
Black Dragons
Filth Burst is an area-effect combination of movement restriction and direct damage, best applied against four or more targets within a 20-foot radius. (It seems to me that, being filthy, it should also obscure visibility somewhat—let’s say anything seen through it is lightly obscured.) Grasping Muck is a movement restrictor with a minimum threshold of three targets, and Noxious Gas is a debilitator for use against four or more.
Blue Dragons
Misleading Mirage is a movement restrictor, but rather than halt movement, it redirects it whichever way the dragon wants. A healthy blue dragon wants to lead its enemies into the path of its lightning breath; a wounded one wants to send its pursuers in the wrong direction. In either case, it wants to steer them away from its hoard. Sudden Sinkhole is a bit of everything—debilitator, movement restrictor and direct damage—but movement restriction is its chief effect. It affects only one target at a time, and it’s not good against nimble foes, who’ll generally be able to leap to safety. Use it to dump a melee opponent—or, better yet, a supporter who’s healing or buffing melee opponents—into a pit they won’t easily get out of.
Green Dragons
Creeper Vines doesn’t fit the chromatic dragon lair action schema; nor, in my opinion, is it particularly threatening. It’s a conjuration ability that chucks distractions onto the battlefield, but it doesn’t have the power to swing the balance of the combat encounter in the dragon’s favor. Pay attention to the fine print in “Creating a Combat Encounter” (Dungeon Master’s Guide, chapter 3): “When making this calculation, don’t count any monsters whose challenge rating is significantly below the average challenge rating of the other monsters in the group unless you think the weak monsters significantly contribute to the difficulty of the encounter.” Zombies (CR 1/4), whose chief power is getting back up when they’re knocked down, aren’t going to “significantly contribute to the difficulty” of a fight against an adult (CR 15) or ancient (CR 22) green dragon. At best, you can think of this lair action as “indirect direct damage.”
Lashing Root is direct damage against a single target, with a possible movement restriction/debilitation side effect that will last only until the target takes its turn and stands back up.
Red Dragons
Noxious Smoke is a strong debilitator for use against four or more targets; it also gives red dragons a vision-obscuring ability, which they heretofore lacked. Searing Heat is direct damage for use against three or more. Indirectly, it’s also a movement restrictor, depending on the extent to which the dragon’s opponents are deterred by the threat of 10 fire damage, plus or minus.
White Dragons
Blinding Sleet gives white dragons a second vision-obscuring ability, minus the damage of Freezing Fog. To be honest, I think it’s a bad tradeoff in two ways: Freezing Fog heavily obscures the whole area, while Blinding Sleet blinds foes only if they fail their Constitution saving throws, and Freezing Fog has a chance of dealing damage, while Blinding Sleet doesn’t. The only thing Blinding Sleet has going for it is that the area of effect is twice as tall, so it can hit flying foes that are between 20 and 40 feet off the ground.
Whirling Wind creates strong wind in a large sphere. Fizban’s isn’t explicit about what strong wind does, so I will be: It imposes disadvantage on ranged weapon attack rolls and on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on hearing, disperses fog, and makes flying creatures fall if they don’t land at the end of their turns (DMG, chapter 5, “Wilderness Survival”). These effects don’t apply to the dragon, of course, just to everyone else. The obvious application of this lair action, therefore, is to show enemies who insist on plinking the dragon from a distance instead of fighting toe-to-toe the error of their ways, as well as to maintain control of the airspace inside the dragon’s lair.
The lair actions that Fizban’s adds to metallic dragons expands them beyond cloud actions and push actions, granting abilities more akin to the chromatic dragons’ lair action types. They also strike me as significantly more powerful than the new lair actions that chromatic dragons get. You thought maybe the good dragons were pushovers? Think again.
Brass Dragons
Animate Statues is a direct damage ability with quite a bit more oomph than the green dragon’s instant zombies, which the drawback that the statues can’t go anywhere. One of two conditions has to exist for this lair action to be truly useful: The lair’s gotta be chock-full of statues, or the statues have to be the only available cover for the dragons’ enemies to hide behind. Blast of Wind and Obscuring Sand are upgrades of the brass dragon’s already existing lair actions, supersizing their areas of effect.
Bronze Dragons
Ocean’s Call is a direct damage ability with a voluminous area of effect. The damage it deals is trifling, but it can affect all the dragon’s enemies—as long as they’re in water. This lair action is for your bronze dragons that, being amphibious, like it better down where it’s wetter. Salt Burst is a more conventional direct damage ability, for use against four or more enemies. Whelming Water, a debilitator, is also for lairs that are wholly or partially underwater, and it also has an area of effect large enough to get everybody whose feet are wet.
Copper Dragons
Laughing Gas is a conventional debilitator for use against four or more targets. Torpid Energy is a debilitator and movement restrictor for use against one, excellent for taking out Dex-dependent attackers at any range. It’s particularly nasty against rangers and monks, because it robs them of their bonus actions, which they need in order to be fully effective; sorcerers and rogues are ripe targets as well.
Gold Dragons
Beguiling Glow, the only new lair action that gold dragons get from Fizban’s, is a debilitator that puts the whammy on six or more foes, reinforcing gold dragons’ general vibe as the Jedi of the dragon family. In only lasts until initiative count 20 of the next round, but you don’t need to tell your players that (until initiative count 20 of the next round). Have your gold dragon spend that round getting the highest and best use of its +13 Persuasion modifier.
Silver Dragons
Silver dragons also get only one new lair action from Fizban’s: Icy Grip is a debilitator and movement restrictor with a massive area of effect that washes over every opponent the dragon can see, although fighters and barbarians will likely shrug it off.
But wait! It’s not just chromatic and metallic dragons that get new lair actions. Shadow dragons and even faerie dragons get them, too! (So do dragon turtles, but I’ll talk about them in a later post.) Shadow dragons get Banish Light, which douses all light within 60 feet of them, magical or not. If the light is created by a spell, the lair action ends it—even if the center of the spell is outside the radius. All the AoEs have to do is touch. This lair action benefits the shadow dragon by enabling its Living Shadow and Shadow Stealth traits, which grant it resistance to most damage types and allow it to Hide as a bonus action. Faerie dragons get the lair actions get the movement restrictor Grasping Plants, useful when at least four opponents are within 20 feet of them, and the indirect damage dealer Chaotic Aura, which diverts missed range attacks toward other combatants.
Next: gem dragons.
