## Aartuk Tactics


“Aartuks are intelligent plant creatures that live to wage war,” Boo’s Astral Menagerie tells us, and thus we learn that bioessentialism is bad when you’re talking about orcs but fine and dandy when you’re talking about ambulatory plants. Snark aside, I do dig the quintilateral radial body plan of these alien creatures, which snatch prey with a stretchy, sticky tongue and walk, grasp and climb with suckers on their leglike branches. These ideas are some good biological what-if-ing.
Aartuks originated in second edition Dungeons & Dragons; along with the original aartuk warrior (ETA: now errata’d to “aartuk weedling,” but I’m not going to search and replace it throughout this post) and aartuk elder, Boo’s gives us an aartuk priest (ETA: errata’d to “aartuk starhorror”—again, not going to search and replace it). Challenge rating–wise, all of them are suitable foes for mid-level adventurers. However, their low saving throw DCs complicate matters.

Take the aartuk warrior, a brute melee fighter with high Strength and above-average Constitution (Wisdom, too, but it doesn’t use it for anything except Perception). Its climbing speed is a mere 20 feet, so if it wants to get close to an enemy who won’t cooperate, it needs to bring that enemy closer to it instead. Its means of doing this is its Tongue bonus action, which grapples an enemy and drags them up to 25 feet closer. Indeed, this tactic is described explicitly in the flavor text in Boo’s. An aartuk warrior always begins its first turn with Tongue, and if it succeeds, it immediately follows up with a Multiattack action, whomping its target twice with its Branches.
Unfortunately, though, Tongue is a recharge ability, and it recharges only on a roll of 6. Combined with a save DC of just 11, this limitation makes Tongue a heck of a gamble. Chances are, an aartuk warrior will get to use Tongue only once in a combat encounter—and it’s more likely than not to fail, because even the average adventurer who’s not proficient in Dexterity saving throws nevertheless has a +1 Dex save modifier.
Is there any way to improve the aartuk warrior’s chances of a successful Tongue grab? As far as I can see, there’s only one: Pit your party against a bunch of aartuk warriors at once and spam it. Roughly one-third to one-half of their Tongue strikes will succeed, and maybe one aartuk warrior will get to use it twice. Only the bell curve makes this tactic viable.
Unfortunately, the slow-moving aartuk warrior doesn’t have a lot else in its tool box. It has the Radiant Pellet ranged attack, but this attack is strictly a plan B: The aartuk warrior prefers melee combat over ranged combat, its chance to hit with Radiant Pellet is poorer, and it deals less damage than a Branch whomp. But if it can’t get within 10 feet of an opponent, flinging pellets is all it can do.
On the plus side, aartuk warriors know their limitations and work sensibly within them. They may lack tactical flexibility, but they know the difference between having an OK chance of success and having little or none, and they recognize right away when the situation has shifted from one to the other. They also choose their targets with care, aiming their Tongue strikes at creatures that look less dexterous (although they’re not smart enough to see past appearances). Yes, low-Dex creatures tend to be front-line fighters who’ll break the grapple with ease, but that’s not the aartuk warrior’s concern; its concern is to get an opponent within whomping reach. The rest is secondary. If the opponent breaks free and moves away again, at least the aartuk gets an opportunity attack against them.
(You know what I’d do if I were designing this creature? I’d think about those suckers on its branches and allow a hit with them to automatically impose the grappled condition as well. Again, not hard to break free, but a little something that makes this melee-oriented creature slightly better at staying in melee.)
The other thing aartuk warriors are good at is knowing when they’re outmatched, and for them, it’s not merely a function of how much damage they’ve taken. It’s also whether they have any reasonable expectation of future successful Tongue strikes. Again, let’s assume a baseline +1 Dex save mod for the aartuks’ opponents, which means only a 45 percent chance that a single aartuk warrior will snag its foe. At the beginning of combat, just two aartuk warriors are enough to give them a two-thirds chance or better that at least one of those Tongue strikes will succeed; with four or more, the probability is greater than 90 percent. After that, however, it’s also necessary to consider the likelihood that Tongue will recharge and give an aartuk warrior another shot. Looking at the chances of a successful second Tongue strike, we see a grimmer picture: It takes 12 or more aartuk warriors to raise that probability above two-thirds.
But that doesn’t mean that a squad of 11 or fewer aartuk warriors will fight for one round and then leave. Remember, the point of Tongue is to force melee engagement. As long as least one aartuk warrior is engaged in melee, the goal is being met. Only when no aartuk warrior is engaged in melee does the Tongue probability calculation come into play. In other words, if the aartuks can’t keep their foes engaged, and their odds of reengaging with further Tongue strikes are unpromising—that is, if there are fewer than 12 of them on the field—they give up and withdraw.
Of course, if the aartuks are obviously losing badly—that is, if at least half of them are seriously wounded (reduced to 15 hp or fewer) and at least half of their opponents aren’t—they also withdraw, Disengaging and using Spider Climb to get out of their opponents’ reach, then Dashing away.
The aartuk priest is like the aartuk warrior in a lot of ways. In particular, it has mostly the same set of combat actions. However, its ability contour is different, with very high Wisdom and lower Strength and Dexterity, orienting it toward a support role. It can fight toe-to-toe or fling Radiant Pellets, but it would rather not. It also doesn’t have most of your usual support capacity, i.e., healing or buff powers. What it can do, however, is use its own Tongue strike to pull an enemy into reach of one of its allies and let it do the whomping instead (“Here, I brought you something. Hope you like it!”). It also has one use per day of revivify, emboldening its warrior allies to fight harder, longer, at least until that one use is expended.
Its most significant ability is easily overlooked: It has one use per day of tongues. That, combined with its Wisdom, means that an outmatched squad of aartuks can halt combat to parley, with the aartuk priest doing the negotiating.* Its Charisma is merely average, and it lacks proficiency in any social skill, but what it does have is a clear-eyed perspective on the situation and the sense to ask whether the aartuks’ own interests and the enemies’ might overlap in some way. But also, with an aartuk priest’s counsel, a squad of aartuk warriors will stay out of battles they oughtn’t get into in the first place. That means that a combat encounter with any group of aartuks that includes an aartuk priest will be, at a minimum, Deadly (see Dungeon Master’s Guide chapter 3, “Creating a Combat Encounter”).
Rally the Troops is a situational ability, and if the situation comes up, the aartuk priest uses it. Most of the time, though, it’s probably not going to come into play.
An aartuk priest is seriously wounded when it’s reduced to 20 hp or fewer. It has a very slightly better chance of succeeding on a Tongue strike than an aartuk warrior has, but it’s not significant enough to reduce the number of aartuks that keep fighting when they can’t remain engaged in melee.
Aside from being much larger, much stronger and somewhat tougher, an aartuk elder is functionally no different from an aartuk warrior. It fights the same way, using the same decision-making process. It also has the Wisdom to avoid battles it can’t win, so again, any combat encounter with a group of aartuks that includes an aartuk elder will be Deadly. Lacking the ability to cast tongues, an aartuk elder can’t call for a parley; it needs an aartuk priest on its side for that. What it can do, however, is cast calm emotions on its opponents to make them more receptive to its priest’s parley attempt.
Also, while all its allies are using Tongue to pull enemies closer, the aartuk elder first uses its own action to cast detect magic, scanning the battlefield for enemies that should be considered especially high-priority targets. If it finds one, it instructs all aartuk warriors that aren’t engaged in melee to focus their Radiant Pellet fire on that target, and it does so itself as well. If nobody’s carrying a conspicuously dangerous magic item, it makes its own judgment about who poses the greatest threat and calls its warriors’ shots accordingly.
The aartuk elder is seriously wounded when it’s reduced to 30 hp or fewer, and once it’s out of immediate danger, it casts sending to alert its best aartuk elder friend to the situation. Alternatively, if it takes another hit once it’s already seriously wounded, it casts sending to try to get a message out before it’s killed.
Next: cute (and not-so-cute) space critters.
* Oh, look—another erratum, in which tongues has been replaced with speak with plants. Are you kidding me? The one useful and distinctive ability this creature has, WotC has taken away, and instead we get an ability that’s completely useless because PCs are not plants?! No. No, no, no, no, no, no. To heck with this erratum. Stet. Revert. And also, while I’m at it, they deleted the fifth graf but left the first graf as it was? In my mind, I’m hurling objects and screaming. Boo’s is already the least impressive WotC sourcebook I’ve spent time analyzing, and this nonsense makes me want to ditch it entirely and start afresh in January with Planescape. ^
