## Esthetic Tactics (and Reigar Revisited)


A while back I wrote about the reigar, a confusingly designed creature that doesn’t seem equipped to do a whole lot besides create copies of itself and fling Chromatic Bolts, and reader Another DM pointed out to me that reigar ships are living beings, called esthetics, that have actions of their own. Is the reigar-esthetic combo any greater than the sum of its parts?
The esthetic has a 60-foot flying speed, 50 percent faster than the median 40-foot flying speed of the spelljamming ships listed in the Astral Adventurer’s Guide, so it should have no trouble overtaking most of them, the zippy damselfly and shrike being the only exceptions. It’s a melee brute with extraordinary Strength and Constitution (and not much else) and blindsight extending 300 feet. It also has tentacles, which can grapple creatures but unfortunately, as written, can’t grapple other ships. It can, however, yank creatures off the decks of other ships.
Additionally, it has a recharging bonus action, Jammerscream, that can disable another ship for days if the pilot fails a Charisma saving throw; even if the pilot succeeds, the ship is still dead in space for more than enough time to play out a combat encounter. It recharges only on a 6, so the esthetic should count on getting to use it only once per encounter, although a surprise recharge is within the realm of possibility. An esthetic can even nab a damselfly or shrike if it can somehow entice that ship into its 300-foot range by sucker-punching it with Jammerscream. In fact, the flavor text in Boo’s Astral Menagerie explicitly lays this modus operandi out.

Having established that the esthetic is equipped to disable other ships and pluck their crew from their decks like ripe fruit, what does this accomplish for its reigar owner? Enemies grappled by the esthetic’s tentacles take automatic damage each round, but the grapple doesn’t also restrain them, so the reigar doesn’t get advantage on its own attacks against them. On the other hand, since they’re taking automatic damage, it doesn’t need to attack them at all; it can pursue foes who’ve fled belowdecks instead. However, we’re looking at another dog-that-caught-the-car situation here, because when the spelljamming helm is on the fritz, its occupant is no longer required to stay put and maneuver the ship, and is free to get up and cast spells at the reigar instead.
On the other hand, the CR 12 esthetic is formidable all by itself—far more so than its reigar, and even more so than the reigar and its “golem” put together (incidentally, “golem” has been errata’d into “duplicate,” a choice that’s not only more culturally sensitive but also more descriptively fitting). When crewmembers are assaulted by an esthetic, it may not even occur to them immediately that they need to worry about the esthetic’s owner as well, giving the reigar a comfortable free round in which to Summon Duplicate (formerly Summon Golem). Now, when the reigar finally emerges from its ship along with its duplicate, with an opponent or two already clutched in the esthetic’s tentacles, it can cast mass suggestion to insinuate to those foes that maybe they’ll be freed from their predicament if only they sing “Hooray!” for the hardness of walls with sufficient conviction and élan. That’s both artsy and psychopathic enough to fit the way the reigar is described—and, of course, it’s just messing with them, having no intention of freeing them at all.
Unfortunately, after that, it’s largely a slugfest, with the reigar and its duplicate chasing down fleeing crewmembers and shooting Chromatic Bolts at them until the encounter is brought to a conclusion. The esthetic keeps snatching crew until there’s no more crew to snatch, reacting to any grappled target who deals it damage that it can actually feel (22 or more in a single turn) by using its dual-Tentacle Multiattack to smash it against the side of its own ship a couple of times, and otherwise using those attacks to strike the ship itself. It lacks the Intelligence to come up with any other plan on its own, but it does have the Wisdom to recognize when it’s seriously wounded (reduced to 86 hp or fewer) and should probably leave. Although it’s generally obedient to its reigar host, when it’s ready to depart, it departs, either leaving its grappled targets floating in space or dropping them to the deck of their ship, and leaving the reigar to make its own way back with dimension door.
So, OK, we’ve managed to come up with an encounter scenario for the reigar and the esthetic that isn’t complete trash. However, I’m not sure how many other such scenarios there are, if any. In any event, it’s absolutely a tier 3 encounter, if you want it to be a fair fight. It’s potentially deadly for tier 2 player characters, and most assuredly fatal at tier 1.
Next: cosmic horrors.
