## Theran Harpy Tactics


Mythic Odysseys of Theros includes two types of harpy, one weaker than the basic Monster Manual harpy and one stronger:the CR 1/8 blood-toll harpy and the unique, CR 5 Nyxborn creature Aphemia. (Fun trivium: “Aphemia” comes from Greek roots meaning “no-voice,” and it’s the clinical name for a type of aphasia in which the ability to speak is lost or severely impaired—appropriate for a creature whose “song” consists of cacophonous noises.)
The blood-toll harpy is a simple—let’s be honest, simplistic—creature. Because of its low challenge rating, it’s always encountered in flocks, outnumbering level 1 player characters two to one and level 2 or higher PCs three to one. Even at level 3, three blood-toll harpies per PC are fairly easy to dispatch; at tier 2 and above, they’re nothing more than a minor hazard, and better to leave them as such than to waste your players’ time with a superflock of 40 or more. As often as not, you’re going to want to speed up the encounter by using mob attacks (chapter 8 of the 2014 Dungeon Master’s Guide, chapter 3 of the 2024 DMG) anyway.
If you are using mob attacks, remember that each blood-toll harpy makes two attacks. Its Bite and Claws attacks are functionally identical, the only difference between them being damage type (piercing vs. slashing), which as we all know is really no difference at all. Also remember that its Blood Frenzy trait gives it advantage on attack rolls against wounded targets. If you’re using 2014 rules, which instruct you to assume one hit per creature with Multiattack, add an extra hit for every two harpies beyond the first, rounded down, against an unwounded target; and assume three hits for every two harpies, rounded down, against one who’s wounded to begin with. If you’re using 2024 rules, use the Normal column against an unwounded target, but if this gives you more than one hit, add one for every three harpies beyond the first; against a target who’s wounded to begin with, use the “With Advantage” column of the Mob Results table.
Blood-toll harpies are shock attackers with a normal self-preservation instinct. They attack for two rounds, after which all surviving harpies fly away, using the Dash action (they’re not smart enough to Disengage).

With her very high Dexterity and Charisma and high Constitution, Aphemia is a skirmisher rather than a shock attacker. She’s in it to win it. As such, she doesn’t attack groups she isn’t confident she can defeat—but with her merely above-average Intelligence, she’s not always the best judge of her intended victims’ strength. It won’t take her long to realize she’s misunderestimated a party of level 5 or higher PCs, and against such a party, she’ll Disengage and retreat to safety as soon as she’s moderately wounded (reduced to 36 hp or fewer). Against level 4 PCs or lower, she’ll keep fighting until she’s seriously wounded (reduced to 20 hp or fewer). She speaks Common but has no interest in parley; instead, she’ll withdraw to a nearby perch out of reach her foes’ melee weapons and scream taunts and imprecations until someone takes a potshot at her, at which point she’ll fly away for real.
That’s assuming she’s fighting solo, however. Her Grave Calling Song action assumes the presence of nearby undead that she can enthrall into fighting for her. How many? My rule of thumb, which I lay out in How to Defend Your Lair (a great last-minute holiday present, if you need one!), is that a boss monster can have a number of minions under its command up to its experience point value divided by 2.5, worth a total of its XP value times 10 on their own. For Aphemia, these formulas mean she can command up to 720 minions, worth a total of up to 18,000 XP. That would allow her to sway up to 360 skeletons or zombies, 90 ghouls or specters, 40 ghasts, 25 wights, or 16 banshees. These terrifying numbers enable Aphemia to pose a real threat to a tier 2 party—although, realistically, PCs of level 8 or higher can focus her down, causing her undead thralls to fall into disorder, without too much trouble.
Grave Calling Song is powerful in proportion to the number of minions around Aphemia: The more minions, the more powerful. It stands to reason, then, that she’ll take this action on her very first turn, activating her allies so that she doesn’t have to fight on her own. A curious thing about this ability is that, for some reason, undead creatures get a saving throw against it. That is, she might be surrounded by 360 skeletons, but roughly 30 percent of them won’t get up when she tries to call them into service—and they’re not going to get up, either, because if they succeed on that first save, they never have to make another. You can let your players fret for as long as they like about what they’re going to do about all those other skellies when they finally do rise and fight, but it’s an empty threat. What you don’t need to do is actually roll those saves. Either calculate in advance how many will succeed or, better yet, just decide how many you want based on your encounter budget and have that many answer the call. (Under 2024 encounter building, for instance—DMG chapter 4—multiply the “High” number for your party’s level by the number of PCs in the party, subtract 1,800 for Aphemia herself, then spend all the rest on undead minions.)
If her minions outnumber her in total XP, which should be true in most cases, her best bet starting in round 2 is to remain airborne and take the Discordant Song action, taking care to place herself where all her enemies will be in earshot. Keeping them frightened deals persistent damage and also makes them weaker against her minions.
But now we run into a technical oversight in how Aphemia’s stat block is written. To keep singing her Grave Calling Song, she has to use her bonus action on her turn. Technically, that still allows her to use Discordant Song as her action. However, the wording of that action—also requiring the use of the bonus action to continue it—strongly implies that she shouldn’t be able to sing both songs at the same time. It doesn’t explicitly say she can’t sing both at once. There’s no mention of concentration. You could have her sing her Discordant Song as her action and her Grave Calling Song as her bonus action. But it feels like cheating.
So I’m inclined instead to say that she starts combat by singing one song. If she, by herself, is powerful enough to constitute a Hard Difficulty encounter (by 2024 reckoning) or a Deadly encounter (per 2014), she chooses the Discordant Song. If she needs undead minions to reach that level of difficulty, she chooses the Grave Calling Song. Now, if she calls up her undead minions and her opponents somehow manage to wipe them out before coming after her directly, she can then switch to the Discordant Song. But as long as she’s still singing the Grave Calling Song, we’re going to treat Discordant Song as off limits.
Therefore, round 2 and all subsequent rounds are for Multiattacking (action) while continuing to shriek-sing (Discordant Song or Grave Calling Song). As a fast flying creature, Aphemia knows that her deadliest foes are those with ranged attacks, so while her undead minions keep the melee fighters occupied, she zeroes in on marksmen and back-line spellcasters, particularly those who look most fragile and vulnerable. A nice thing about dive-bombing ranged attackers is that she doesn’t have to fly back out of their reach at the end of her turn. Staying in their faces is in fact better, because they’ll be at disadvantage if they try to make a ranged attack against her, and she’ll get an opportunity attack (Bite is preferred) if they try to back off without blowing their action on Disengaging. If and when a melee-capable opponent comes to their rescue, she can then Disengage and reevaluate her options.
When fighting alongside undead allies, Aphemia doesn’t call it quits until she’s seriously wounded, although if she’s moderately wounded and still has plenty of minions left, she may fly up out of reach for a while—say, to an altitude of 100 feet, out of normal range for a setting-appropriate shortbow, although she has the wits to adapt if some Odysseus-come-lately brings a longbow to the fight—and let those minions chew her enemies up for a while before returning to the fray.
Next: cerberuseses.
