## Bodytaker Plant Tactics


If you’ve ever had a hankering to reenact Invasion of the Body Snatchers at your table, bodytaker plants are the monster for you. The mechanics are a bit different—rather than be transformed by individual pods, victims are transformed in a chamber within the body of a huge parent plant—but the result, a crowd of simulacra of previously existing people, is the same.
Bodytaker plants are big and slow; unnervingly, however, they can climb and swim as well as drag themselves across the ground. Their exceptional Strength and extraordinary Constitution make them brute fighters, but even if they lacked those abilities, their low speed would shoehorn them into a melee combat role. They simply aren’t mobile enough to avoid being charged, and they have no way to attack at range. They have to tough it out.

Despite their high Intelligence and Wisdom, bodytaker plants have little tactical flexibility, because there just isn’t much they can do. They have one basic melee attack, Vine Lash, which their Multiattack allows them to make three times per turn. They have to succeed with this attack to enable their secondary melee attack, Entrapping Pod, which initiates the transformation of their victims. Aside from being able to communicate telepathically with their offspring through the Podling Link trait, and the fact that “killing” the plant isn’t enough to keep it from regrowing—you have to literally salt the earth to do it (OK, herbicide works too)—that’s the extent of their ability to harm their foes.
So let’s dig into the implications of these. What, for instance, does it mean that bodytaker plants have Charisma as exceptional as their Strength, despite not having any sort of magical attack? To me, it means that they have two primary offensive approaches, of which lashing out with vines is only one. The other is commanding their offspring to run interference. In other words, bodytaker plants should never be encountered alone.
As for their Intelligence and Wisdom, since these don’t offer any flexibility of action, their main benefit must be in flexibility of target selection. A bodytaker plant is smart enough to assess its enemies’ weaknesses and prudent enough to lie low most of the time, taking on most threats by proxy, and keeping enough minions close by to shield it from mortal danger.
Since target selection is so important, whom should a bodytaker plant be focusing on? Let’s come at this question from two angles: Which of its enemies’ attacks are strongest against it? Which of its enemies are weakest to its own attacks?
Bodytaker plants are vulnerable to poison, so anyone who inflicts this type of damage is a top-priority target. Unfortunately, a bodytaker plant won’t know whether one of its enemies employs poison until it’s already taken damage from some, but once that happens, the enemy who inflicted it is a priority target. Druids are to be presumed extremely dangerous, as are rangers, to a lesser extent. Aside from these, a bodytaker plant’s strongest opponents are simply those who can deal damage from more than 20 feet away—the maximum reach of their vines. All of these foes should be mobbed by minions.
The bodytaker plant’s Vine Lash is a straightforward melee attack (thus, targeting Armor Class) that grapples (thus, Strength and Dexterity should both be low, to prevent escape) and sets up Entrapping Pod, for which a failed Constitution saving throw simplifies matters greatly. Low Strength, Dex and Con? We’re definitely not talking about any front-line meatsacks here; in fact, since the DCs on these d20 rolls are 15 and 16, we can assume that the bodytaker plant’s typical victim is a commoner, with +0’s across the board. Otherwise, the plant wouldn’t even have a two-thirds chance of prevailing.
No, the best target for DNA reconfiguration is the poor schlimazel who isn’t a front-line warrior but is unlucky enough to be standing within 20 feet of the bodytaker plant. Obviously, if a melee combatant smacks a bodytaker plant, it’s going to smack back, but without any expectation that there’s more to be gained from it than a modest hit point reduction. (In fact, a grappled and restrained martial type may not even bother to try to break free if they can keep landing hits despite having disadvantage on their attack rolls.) Since the bodytaker plant can only envelop a single creature at a time and transformation takes quite a while, it’s not going to waste its effort on an opponent it may not be able to transform. Add up each opponent’s AC and Strength, Dexterity and Constitution modifiers. The lower the total, the better the candidate for podification. If a decent candidate isn’t within reach, the bodytaker plant orders its minions to grab the best ones and haul them closer.
A bodytaker plant certainly has sense enough to try to save itself when it’s badly wounded, but it more or less has to fight to the death, because the thing is so dadblamed slow, even a dwarf with a sprained ankle can outrun it. Unfortunately, retreat is out of the question.
Podlings are the offspring of a bodytaker plant, simulacra of the people it’s consumed. These are also brutes, with high Strength and Constitution, and also slow, though not as slow as the parent plant. They have no real offensive clout—their Slam attack deals an average of 5 damage on a hit—but they can take a beating. More important, they’re available in nearly infinite supply. Just go to town with how many of these you throw at your player characters. They also don’t have to use that Slam attack; in some cases, it may be better to have them pile on an enemy, grapple them and shove them prone, thereby immobilizing them. They can then pound on that enemy to their hearts’ content—or drag them to a bodytaker plant for processing. Or throttle them. (Ever thought of using the suffocation rule in chapter 8 of the Player’s Handbook to handle strangulation?)
While not geniuses, podlings aren’t stupid, either. Also, they’re living beings, of a sort, and they do prefer to stay that way. If things start to go wrong, they can adjust, and when not under direct command of a bodytaker plant, they’ll flee to save themselves. Again, however, speed is an issue. With only 20 feet of movement—40 feet if it Dashes—a podling isn’t going to leave its pursuers in the dust. Dashing away isn’t a great strategy for a podling that’s seriously wounded (reduced to 10 hp or fewer), but it’s better than the alternatives, especially when visibility is poor. When they are under direct command of a bodytaker plant, podlings do what they’re told, even when it would result in their own demise; they also benefit from their parent plant’s greater target selection acumen and choose their foes accordingly.
And that concludes my examination of Ezmerelda’s Guide to Ravenloft. I’ll be back next time with another book—maybe Spelljammer, maybe Theros or Ravnica. We’ll see.
