## Space Clown Tactics


“Space clowns.” Cripes, it pains me to have to type that phrase. Spelljammer is a campy setting to begin with, but space clowns go way past campy and into overtly loony. The worst part is, I was certain that space clowns had been included in Boo’s Astral Menagerie because they were legacy content from an earlier edition of Spelljammer, but no—to the best of my ability to discover, they are in fact brand-new to fifth edition Dungeons & Dragons. If I’d realized that earlier, I’d have relegated them to the memory hole along with the Creature That Shall Not Be Named. But I promised a writeup on space clowns at the end of my last post, so now I’m committed.
With a challenge rating of 2, space clowns are calibrated to appear alone or in small groups against low-level parties, in groups of one or two per player character against mid-level parties, and in mobs against high-level parties. Their very high Strength, Dexterity and Charisma indicate that they’re shock attackers that switch flexibly both between melee and ranged attacks and between weapon attacks and magical abilities. Unusually, they have proficiency in Performance and Sleight of Hand, which suggests that misdirection and theft are part of their bag of tricks (though more useful outside combat than during). Darkvision implies that they prefer encounters in darkness or dim light, in which their shenanigans are harder to detect.
Normally, shock attackers don’t let themselves get enmeshed in drag-out melee encounters, but space clowns have the Dying Burst trait, which gives them an incentive to position themselves next to as many opponents as possible when seriously wounded. It does a space clown no good whatsoever to run away from a fight only to get picked off by a crossbow shot from 80 feet away. Leaping into a cluster of melee opponents, however—or, better yet, a cluster of innocent bystanders—maximizes the impact of Dying Burst. It’s also a pure expression of their chaotic evil alignment. How do PCs handle a seriously wounded space clown that’s using a crowd as humanoid shields, knowing that finishing it off will cause it to explode, injuring or killing everyone around it?

As if that weren’t enough of a conundrum, a space clown that’s fled into a crowd can use its Phantasmal Form bonus action to disguise itself. Then, to make matters worse, it can attack itself with Shock or Ray Gun and detonate its Death Burst—although only a space clown that’s on its last legs will resort to such a stunt. The space clown’s humanoid-average Wisdom indicates a normal self-preservation instinct; it won’t intentionally harm itself if it has any chance of surviving until its next combat turn.
Space clowns aren’t stupid or foolish, but neither are they especially smart or sagacious. Beyond their instincts for mayhem, they’re not strategic thinkers, nor are they sophisticated in their target selection. That makes it a challenge to determine when they should rush into melee and use their (literal) Shock attack, when they should hang back and fire their Ray Guns, and when they should use their limited-use spells, mirror image and spider climb. Shock deals the most damage by far, but Ray Gun has a chance of incapacitating targets with a hideous laughter–like rider effect, while mirror image and spider climb offer the low–Armor Class space clowns a measure of additional defense.
I’m going to posit just a few ideas that pop into my head. These don’t constitute any kind of coherent strategy or tactical heuristic, but for something called a “space clown,” do they have to?

Ray Gun works at long distances. If a space clown can’t get within melee reach of any of its foes, it may as well make a Ray Gun attack.
A volley of Ray Gun attacks can potentially reduce the number of enemy attacks a group of space clowns has to fend off. It can also reveal whether the space clowns should simply give up on using their Ray Guns, if everyone on the opposing side succeeds on their saving throw against that not-very-high DC.
While on the one hand that not-very-high save DC suggests that maybe the Ray Gun attack is subpar, on the other hand it suggests that the best way to use it is to spam it. The more saving throws enemies are forced to roll, the more likely it is that one of them will fail.
Saving throws to recover from the Ray Gun’s side effect are made at the end of an affected creature’s turn, so an incapacitated opponent will remain so for at least one full turn, giving the nearest space clown a good opening to rush in and Shock them.
Spider climb makes more sense in enclosed spaces where a space clown can position itself on a ceiling or high up a wall and take Ray Gun potshots, or in crowded town streets where it can scamper up the side of a building. In wider-open spaces, such as in ship-to-ship combat, it doesn’t offer much value.
Mirror image is good defense, but it has an opportunity cost: A space clown could use its action to attack instead. The best time to cast it, I think, is when an enemy front-liner is rushing a space clown to engage in melee but hasn’t yet come within reach. But another possibility is that a group of space clowns about to launch an attack might all cast mirror image at once just before engaging. It lasts a full minute and doesn’t require concentration; few combat encounters with space clowns are going to last longer than that.
Another space clown attack scenario, however, is one in which they initiate combat while disguised by Phantasmal Form. In this instance, they’ll attack with surprise—Phantasmal Form explicitly states that seeing through their illusion requires an action—and why waste a surprise round on anything other than an attack roll?
One of my axioms about chaotic evil creatures is that they like to pick on the weak, and I think that for space clowns this preference is practically a compulsion. Once they’ve initiated combat, they aim their attacks at whoever has the fewest hit points, including noncombatants—with a couple of exceptions. First, they prefer an incapacitated target over one who’s free to act. Second, if they themselves are attacked, they’ll retaliate against whoever attacked them, which may lead to complications if they’re attacked by more than one foe at once. If they’re engaged in melee, they’ll focus on that over any opponent who’s taking shots at them from a distance. But when choosing from multiple melee opponents or multiple ranged opponents, they strike at the one closest to 0 hp. And if they don’t have another attacker to deal with when they reduce an enemy to 0 hp, they’ll keep attacking that enemy until they’re dead.
Shock deals solid damage. Making a Shock attack is never wrong.

Do space clowns flee? Well, they definitely run and hide. Normal self-preservation instinct plus evil alignment equals withdrawing when seriously wounded (reduced to 23 hp or fewer), but “withdrawing” in this case is less likely to mean leaving the area entirely and more likely to mean darting around a corner, then disguising oneself with Phantasmal Form or casting spider climb to retreat to the relative safety of rooftops. (Mind you, a space clown can’t do both at once: Phantasmal Form and spider climb compete for its concentration.) Running away altogether is something space clowns do only when routed, such as when their enemies manage to seriously wound them all in just one or two combat rounds.
Ironically, this irritatingly ridiculous monster turns out to be one of the more tactically interesting Spelljammer monsters I’ve looked at lately. I suggest reskinning it into something less cartoonish while retaining the combination of menace and madness.
Next: starlight apparitions.
